GEP-713 resurrected (#3609)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: geps/gep-713/index.md

# GEP-713: Metaresources and Policy Attachment

* Issue: [#713](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/713)

> * Status: Standard

Reviewer: I don't feel we should be moving this to `Standard` at this time, I think it's more appropriate to leave this in `Memorandum`:

```suggestion
* Status: Memorandum
```

Allow me to explain:

At a mechanical level there are some major changes in this GEP (which I think are great improvements, personally). Implementations will need time to catch up to these major changes and provide feedback, which is more what `Experimental` has been meant for in the past (though I think we're generally agreed that's not the right status for this document, as we've established in the past), so `Standard` does not appear to accurately reflect that state.

Additionally our current [Graduation Criteria](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/main/site-src/concepts/versioning.md#graduation-criteria) is not very well equipped for guidance documentation like this (for instance, how much can we really "test this"?). As such `Memorandum` which is meant in this context to mean a "written agreement" still seems mechanically like the best state we have today for this to fit under.

We also do not have broad and general agreement from API Machinery on this pattern. If we present this as `Standard` instead of an "interim solution with risks and caveats" I think this may ignore the agency of API Machinery in such matters, and the value we stand to gain from working through this problem further with them.

Lastly, I can anticipate some potential negative consequences of presenting this document as `Standard`, which seems to give a sense that "This is the standard. This is the way you should solve this problem." whereas I think where we are actually at is "This is an agreement on the best solution we have today for some implementations under some situations. It comes with risks and caveats that an implementer should be well aware of, and must think through critically before deciding to utilize it".

In a follow up comment I will go into more details about my opinions on the positioning/messaging here.

Author: These are very good points, which, on my part, I feel hard to refute.

If you all agree `Memorandum` would create the least friction at this point, I'm fine with it.

Reviewer 2: I'm very much in favor of `Memorandum` rather than `Standard`. 🙂

Reviewer 3: `Memorandum` seems better to me as well.  It does bear mentioning that Policy Attachment was accepted as a Standard candidate, so we probably need to be clear on what is a Standard candidate in the future.  What will we say about this in the release notes or blog, something like: "Policy Attachment is once again a Memorandum document"?  Will readers understand this as a forward step?

Author: Done

(See status definitions [here](/geps/overview/#gep-states))

## TLDR

> This GEP aims to standardize terminology and processes around using one Kubernetes object to modify the functions of one or more other objects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This GEP aims to standardize terminology and processes around "metaresources", e.g. using one Kubernetes object to modify the functions of one or more other objects.
```

Author: Done, with the only difference that I used _id est_ instead of _exempli gratia_ 🙂

> It lays out guidelines for Gateway API implementations and other stakeholders for the design and/or handling of custom “metaresource” definitions in compliance with a standard known as Policy Attachment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It lays out guidelines for Gateway API implementations and other stakeholders for the design and/or handling of custom “metaresource” definitions in compliance with a pattern known as Policy Attachment.
```

> This GEP specifies a _pattern_, not an API field or new object. It defines some terms, including _Metaresource_, _Policies_ and _Policy Attachment_, and their related concepts.

Reviewer: This is a follow up to TODO.

## Overall Messaging

Here I feel strongly we should change the language from "standardize terminology" to something more like "provides an interim solution". It should make it clear that this guidance can be helpful under certain conditions, but is not an effective standard in its own right.

## Risks & Caveats

I think we should have "Risks & Caveats" be a bold section right at the top of this document (as `!!! danger` was previously). As the first thing a potential implementer would read should this new section should make it **very** clear that they should not simply follow this guidance if they feel they have a compatible need, that there are risks and caveats to following this pattern which they need to scrutinize before making a decisions. In particular it should highlight:

* That this pattern is so far agreed upon only by Gateway API implementers who were in need of an immediate solution and didn't want all their solutions to be completely different and disparate, but doesn't have wide agreement or review from the rest of Kubernetes (particularly API Machinery).
* It is then conceivable that this problem domain gets a different solution in core in the future at which time we might consider consider this pattern obsoleted by that one.
* When implementations have need of something that's not in the spec, they should prefer other means (e.g. trying to work their feature into the upstream spec) _before_ considering creating their own custom policies.
* Link to all the sections below that talk about specific risks and caveats.
* Ultimately we _strongly_ advise any implementation that is considering using this guidance should check in with the community (zoom, slack, discussions, etc) and share their use case before making a decision, so that they can better understand the potential implications of their decision.

This I feel will _reduce_ the downsides for implementations over time, and help inform decisions.

Author: On my count, that's 4 against 1 🙂 I'm gonna leave my passion out of it and admit that calling out the risks and caveats early on seems now the most prudent thing to do.

I'm also happy that we're expanding the list beyond the discoverability problem (which remains legit), not posing Policy Attachment in direct conflict with other ways to extend the API, while thinking on this GEP strategically as well. We want to embrace the pattern, but only as long as it doesn't harm the development of the core API.

Well said, @shaneutt!

I'll make sure to bring this to the top of the doc if others agree.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, @guicassolato!

Reviewer 3: I agree to some extent, but:

> It is then conceivable that this problem domain gets a different solution in core in the future at which time we might consider consider this pattern obsoleted by that one.

That implies that any policies that we have now will remain Experimental forever.  Some implementations will never use Experimental features, so we have to give some kind of guarantee on existing policies.  I was hoping this GEP refactor would help us with a guarantee.

> When implementations have need of something that's not in the spec, they should prefer other means (e.g. trying to work their feature into the upstream spec) before considering creating their own custom policies.

It should be built into the definition here that custom policies promote expressiveness in Gateway API when it's not possible to express a given concept with other means.

Author: I ended up almost copying @shaneutt's version for the risks and caveats, stated at the top of the doc. However, I don't want to overlook the points raised by @candita, but I think they are very important.

## Goals

* Establish a pattern for metaresources which will be used for any metaresources and policies included in the Gateway API spec.
* Establish a pattern that must be adopted for any implementation-specific metaresources and policies used with Gateway API resources.
* Discuss the problems with communicating status for metaresource objects, and suggest mechanisms that APIs can use to mitigate some of them.
* Provide a way to distinguish between required and default values for all metaresource API implementations.
* Enable Policy Attachment at all relevant scopes in Gateway API, including Gateways, Routes, Backends, along with how values should flow across a hierarchy if necessary.
* Ensure the Policy Attachment specification is generic and forward thinking enough that it could be easily adapted to other grouping mechanisms like Namespaces in the future.
* Provide a means of attachment that works for both ingress and mesh implementations of Gateway API.

> * Provide a consistent specification that will ensure familiarity between both included and implementation-specific metaresources so they can both be interpreted the same way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Provide a consistent specification that will ensure familiarity between both API-defined and implementation-specific metaresources so they can both be interpreted the same way.
```

* Provide a reference pattern to other implementations of metaresource and policy APIs outside of Gateway API, that are based on similar concepts (i.e., augmenting the behavior of other Kubernetes objects, attachment points, nested contexts and inheritance, Defaults & Overrides, etc.)

## Out of scope

* Define all potential metaresource and policy kinds that may be attached to resources.

> ## Background

Reviewer 4: Somewhere early in this GEP, I'd recommend adding some guidance on _when_ this pattern should be used. IE, if you can modify the API you're extending directly, that's often going to provide a better UX than policy attachment. I think you're saying something similar in this introduction, but it could be helpful to make that guidance more clear.

Reviewer 3: I think what @robscott is saying is similar to the "prefer other means" @shaneutt mentioned in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3609/files?diff=split&w=0#r1971718148.

Author: I think this is better covered now with the risks and caveats called out at the top of the doc and the new "User stories" section.

When designing Gateway API, a recurring challenge became apparent. There was often a need to change the behavior of objects without modifying their specs. Sometimes, this is because changing the spec of the object to hold the new piece of information is not possible (e.g., `ReferenceGrant`, from [GEP-709](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-709/), when affecting Secrets and Services), and sometimes it’s because the behavior change is intended to flow across multiple objects (see [Semantics](#semantics-why) of metaresources and [Inherited](#inherited) class of metaresources).

> 

Reviewer 3: I propose two other reasons: 

- the metaresource could be applied at different scopes of parent/child object relationships, so in some cases it is better to extract the declaration than to add two new fields representing the same functionality to an existing object.
- it may be easier to implement metaresources that represent flow with an extracted declaration, rather than force a decision that dictates where the resource is placed and force changes to established implementations.

To put this another way, sometimes we need ways to be able to affect how an object is interpreted in the API, without representing the description of those effects inside the spec of the object. This document describes the ways to design objects to meet use cases like these.

This document introduces the concept of a “metaresource”, a term used to describe the class of objects that _only_ augment the behavior of another Kubernetes object, regardless of what they are targeting.

“Meta” here is used in its Greek sense of “more comprehensive” or “transcending”, and “resource” rather than “object” because “metaresource” is more pronounceable than “meta object”.

> After a few iterations of Gateway API experimenting with this pattern－both, with its own common kinds of metaresources such as the `BackendTLSPolicy`, as well as via multiple implementation-specific kinds of metaresources (see examples of [current use of metaresources](#current-use-of-metaresources))－ and rounds of discussion such as the one at [kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions#2927](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/2927), the pattern has been enhanced to its current form.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After a few iterations of Gateway API experimenting with this pattern－both, with its own common kinds of metaresources such as the `BackendTLSPolicy` and `BackendLBPolicy`, as well as via multiple implementation-specific kinds of metaresources (see examples of [current use of metaresources](#current-use-of-metaresources))－ and rounds of discussion such as the one at [kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions#2927](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/2927), the pattern has been enhanced to its current form.
```

## Definition

### Metaresources

> *Metaresources* are objects that augment the behavior of other objects (*targets*) in a clean and standard way, by declaring additional specification for these targets “from the outside”－i.e., without directly modifying the objects whose behavior the metaresource intends to affect, nor requiring any reference from the objects to the metaresources that affect them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*Metaresources* are objects that augment the behavior of other objects (*targets*) in a clean and deterministic way, by declaring additional specification for these targets “from the outside”－i.e., without directly modifying the objects whose behavior the metaresource intends to affect, nor requiring any reference from the objects to the metaresources that affect them.
```

> Metaresources follow a well-known structure that declares clearly a *target* and an *intent*.

Reviewer 3: Could also be considered a Decorator pattern.

Author: Agreed. I'll incorporate it in the text. It may indeed help people with an OOP background understand the concept. Thanks!

Author: Hmmm. Actually, now having second thoughts... By reading "decorator pattern", could some people inadvertently think a metaresource "wraps the target", as in it behaves like the object it targets except for the decoration it adds on top? That would be the wrong message. WDYT?

Reviewer 3: How about adding a reference to the specific pattern you're talking about here, or if one can't be found then state that it is a new and necessary pattern needed to enhance expressiveness in Gateway API?

Author: I guess the [Composite pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Composite_pattern) is probably a closer fit?

While the targets of a metaresource give the metaresource a *context*, the spec proper declares the *intent* within that context.

A typical metaresource looks like the following – example provided based on a hypothetical `ColorPolicy` kind of metaresource:

```yaml
apiVersion: policies.controller.io/v1
kind: ColorPolicy
metadata:
  name: my-color-policy
spec:
  targetRefs: ## target objects whose behaviour to augment
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
    kind: Gateway
    name: my-gateway
  rules:      ## the "spec proper" describing the intent, i.e. color the traffic blue
    color: blue
```

#### Properties of metaresources

##### Targetability (“where”)

Metaresources specify one or more target resources or specific sections of resources, whose behavior the metaresource intends to augment.

##### Semantics (“why”)

Targeting a resource (or section of a resource) must be interpreted within a given semantics that is proper to the metaresource kind.

> Two different metaresource kinds that allow targeting resources of a same a given kind X may have very different semantics, not only because the purpose of the two metaresource kinds differ, but because the mechanics of calculating and applying the augmented behavior for X can as well be very different between metaresource kinds.

Reviewer 4: This seems to go against the goal of policy attachment? I'd thought of this GEP as trying to define standard and predictable ways to extend Gateway API. If instead something that looks similar can behave wildly differently, that could introduce more confusion.

Author: What I tried to convey here is, e.g., that targeting a `Gateway` kind can mean "augment the behaviour of the gateway" or "augment the behaviour of all the routes attached to the gateway" or yet "…all backends", etc. It really depends on the design of the metaresource kind.

One who sees, for example, a `ColorPolicy` kind and a `ScramblePolicy` kind, where both kinds allow targeting the `Gateway` kind, will likely assume "Color" and "Scramble" have different purposes (different kinds of augmented behaviour), but may not realise at a glance that maybe one kind has nothing to do with routes and only affects the gateway configuration itself, while the other maybe affects the routes (…under the gateway, like it could also be the ones under a service).

In [this](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/2927#discussioncomment-9737944) comment I suggested adding something to the CRD (a label, an annotation) that tells what is the "kind of resource the Policy actually augments the behavior of". I didn't get much feedback on it unfortunately.

Reviewer 3: Maybe this is a better way to put it:
```suggestion
Two different metaresource kinds that allow targeting resources of the same given kind X may have very different semantics, not only because the purpose of the two metaresource kinds differ, but also because the mechanics of calculating and applying the augmented behavior differ.  See the discussion on merge strategies below.
```

Author: I believe this is a lot better covered now after re-organising of the text. Thanks @robscott and @candita for the suggestions!

> Often, the semantics of a metaresource is tightly coupled to the relationships and connections a target has with other kinds of objects, typically organized in a hierarchy of nested contexts. In this sense, targeting a given resource kind may have the semantics of spanning effect across yet other objects to which the target is related.

Author: @candita, do you think we should substitute "semantics" with "scope" as the second property of metaresources?

By _semantics,_ I meant "what targeting kind X means in the context of this metaresource kind". But I agree, effectively what this property does is to define the _scope_ of application of the metaresource.

> Often, the semantics of a metaresource is tightly coupled to the relationships and connections a target has with other kinds of objects, typically organized in a hierarchy of nested contexts. In this sense, targeting a given resource kind may have the semantics of spanning effect across yet other objects to which the target is related.

Reviewer 3: Yes, "semantics" means something more vague than scope.  I've also heard the term "granularity" to describe relative size/importance, e.g. "finer granularity" meaning that entities can be examined with a local scope (adjacent or subset) rather than global scope (above or superset).

##### Mergeability (“how”)

> Metaresources specify so-called *merge strategies* that dictate how multiple instances of the metaresource affecting a same resource (or section of a resource) should be dealt with in terms of calculating and enforcing a single set of rules specified by the metaresources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Metaresources can also specify so-called *merge strategies* that dictate how multiple instances of the metaresource affecting the same resource (or section of a resource) should be handled.
```

Author: I like the simplification of "[…] should be handled."

Not sure about "can also" though. In my view, all metaresources specify a merge strategy, even if implicitly (by not discriminating any merge strategy and therefore applying the default merge strategy of no merges at all).

Maybe "specify" is not the word, but I would like to be clear that _mergeability_ is a core property of metaresources, even when that merge strategy is no-merge.

Reviewer 3: Ok, I didn't understand that there was an implicit default.  Did I miss it or is it not yet stated?

The merge strategies typically include strategies for dealing with conflicting and/or missing specs, such as for applying default and/or override values on the target resources.

### Policies and Policy Attachment

> Often when applying a metaresource, the intent has to do with specifying *rules* that control the behavior of the targets in action. E.g., for networking resources, the augmented behavior specified by a metaresource targeting an object can relate to conditions to let traffic flow or to block traffic at particular points of the network; in a different scenario, it can describe rules to mutate the traffic while it flows through the network at the point represented by the target object.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure why, but I find this paragraph difficult to follow. If there's a way to simplify the language here, it may help make it easier to understand.

Author: I can see how we may be piling up too many definitions and concepts here indeed.

Perhaps we're better off with "policy attachment" as simply the "attachment of a policy resource to its target", as more or less said.

In this case, should it be spelled lowercase then? Should we probably stop referring to this GEP/pattern as "Policy Attachment"?

The semantics of *applying rules to a target* characterizes these particular instances of metaresources as *policies*, thus here emerging in relation to this pattern the concept of *Policy Attachment*.

> Policies are therefore a strict subset of metaresources which distinguish itself subtly from the whole on the fact that the augmented behavior described by policies resemble *conditional rules*, while the mechanism of targeting an object or set of objects (“attaching to objects”) is nonetheless exactly the same as in the general definition of metaresources.

Reviewer 4: This may be easier to communicate with a simple table or diagram that illustrates that policies are a subset of metaresources.

Author: I ended up removing this from the text. I kept only the one-liner suggested by @kflynn defining policies as "an example of metaresources whose intent is to specify rules…"

Without loss of generality, the very activation of the context (targets) of metaresources can be understood as the _conditions_ for the enforcement of the intended augment behavior (rules) that are specified in the metaresources, and therefore these can often be refered to as policies interchangeably.

## Applications

### Reasons for using metaresources and policies

These are a few reasons for using metaresources and policies over another (possibly more direct) way to modify the spec (“augment the behavior”) of an object:

* Extending otherwise stable APIs – e.g. to specify additional network settings for the Kubernetes Service object.
* Defining implementation-specific functionalities for otherwise common APIs－e.g. to specify implementation-specific behavior for Gateway API HTTPRoute objects.
* Decoupling concerns for targeting personas with specific functionality and configuration－ delegation of responsibilities, fine-grained RBAC.
* Decoupling responsibility over the management and implementation of the metaresources themselves.

> * Avoid alternatives based on annotations which are often non-standardized, poorly documented, and generally hard to maintain.

Reviewer 3: Again, I would add that using policies helps maintain an expressive API because they try to self-document intent, unlike annotations/labels.

### Examples of applications of metaresources and policies

* Specifying traffic rules for Kubernetes Services
* Configuring implementation-specific authentication features on ingress Gateways

> * Delegating responsibility over parts of the configuration (e.g. auth) to other users

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Delegating responsibility over parts of the configuration (e.g. auth) to other personas
```

* Inspecting and auditing focused aspects of a resource (e.g. auth policies)

> ## Guide-level explanation

Reviewer 3: What's "Guide-level"?  Implementation guide?

Author: It's a mix of implementation and user's guide.
It's meant for all readers that want to understand how metaresources work.

Because many things related to metaresources are implementation-specific, it's hard to write a guide that says exactly how they should be implemented, so we hint on the different options, what's a SHOULD and what's a MUST within those options, lay out some abstract definitions that are generic enough for all implementations and kinds of metaresources, etc.

Arguably, this is also useful to users of metaresources, not only to the implementations－even if only to the most interested users who will care to learn about Gateway API at this level.

Author: Tried to make that clear in the _caput_ of the section.

### Defining context: scoping intent in relation to targets

The objects targeted by a metaresource define a *context* where the *intent* that is specified in the metaresource itself is expected to be honored. This context exists in the form of other Kubernetes objects (or parts of objects) and referenced in the metaresources directly or indirectly by name or other referencing mechanisms.

#### Ways of targeting objects

Metaresources MAY be designed using different targeting methods, such as targeting objects by name (“reference by name”), using label selectors, and targeting with or without cross-namespace references allowed. In all cases, in order to fit within the framework described in this document, the targets MUST be declared within a `targetRefs` field within the spec of the metaresource instance.

> All kinds of references SHOULD also specify Group, Version and Kind (GVK) information alongside the selector (unless the API ensures no more than one kind of object can be targeted).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All kinds of references SHOULD also specify Group, Version and Kind (GVK) information as part of the target (unless the API ensures no more than one kind of object can be targeted).
```

  )

  type ColorPolicy struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    // Spec defines the desired state of the policy.
    Spec ColorPolicySpec `json:"spec"`

    // Status defines the current state of the policy.
    Status ColorPolicyStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
  }

  type ColorPolicySpec struct {
    // TargetRefs specify the targets of the policy by label.
    // The following kinds are supported: …
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16
    TargetRefs []TargetRef `json:"targetRefs"`

    // rest of the spec ("spec proper")…
  }

  type TargetRef struct {
    // Group is the group of the target object.
    Group Group `json:"group"`

    // Kind is the kind of the target object.
    Kind Kind `json:"kind"`

    // Selector is the label selector of target objects of the specified kind.
    Selector *metav1.LabelSelector `json:"selector"`
  }
  ```
</details>

##### Cross namespace references

Metaresources can opt for allowing instances to target objects across Kubernetes namespaces, in which case an optional `namespace` field MUST be defined with the target reference.

> Although not strictly forbidden, this is in general discouraged due to [discoverability](#the-discoverability-problem) issues and security implications. Implementations that opt for designing metaresources that allow for cross namespace references should consider supporting [ReferenceGrants](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/referencegrant/?h=referencegrant) to address the security concern.

Reviewer 4: I'd argue that if we want to allow cross-namespace references, we need at least one of the following to be true:

1. The policy is applied client-side and does not grant the client any additional access or permissions than it would otherwise have.
2. The policy is paired with ReferenceGrant or some other form of equivalent handshake that ensures that the target is accepting this policy. 

It's probably worth mentioning the confused deputy problem here for some context.

  ```go
  package color

  import (
    metav1 "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1"
    gatewayapiv1alpha2 "sigs.k8s.io/gateway-api/apis/v1alpha2"
  )

  type ColorPolicy struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    // Spec defines the desired state of the policy.
    Spec ColorPolicySpec `json:"spec"`

    // Status defines the current state of the policy.
    Status ColorPolicyStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
  }

  type ColorPolicySpec struct {
    // TargetRefs specify the targets of the policy by name.
    // The following kinds are supported: …
    // +listType=map
    // +listMapKey=group
    // +listMapKey=kind
    // +listMapKey=namespace
    // +listMapKey=name
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16
    TargetRefs []gatewayapiv1alpha2.NamespacedPolicyTargetReference `json:"targetRefs"`

    // rest of the spec ("spec proper")…
  }
  ```
</details>

> #### Spanning behavior across relationships of a target

Reviewer 4: You're using the "indirect" and "direct" terminology in this section, it's likely worth some kind of parallel example to show how the two approaches could work. I know you have something like that in the second paragraph, but it would help me follow if there were separate subsections showing how the two methods work.

One detail I'm missing here is that in a previous iteration of policy attachment "indirect" also meant hiearchical with defaults and overrides but I'm not seeing that here.

Author: Indeed, here "indirect" does not imply defaults and overrides, only that the kind ultimately affected by the metaresource is not the one you see in the `targetRefs` stanza, but something else related to that object.

Other than that, I think I kept the terminology previously adopted of "direct" and "inherited" (not "indirect", which may sound surprising but does not appear anywhere in GEP-713) though, where `Inherited ⊂ Direct` (except that now incorporating enhancements discussed in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/2927.)

Happy to split this subsection into two smaller ones if it helps.

```mermaid
---
config:
  look: handDrawn
  theme: neutral
---
graph
    a1@{ shape: rect }
    b1@{ shape: rect }
    b2@{ shape: rect }
    c1@{ shape: rect }
    c2@{ shape: rect }
    m1@{ shape: stadium }
    m2@{ shape: stadium }

    a1 --> b1
    a1 --> b2
    b1 --> c1
    b2 --> c1
    b2 --> c2

    m1 -.-> a1
    m2 -.-> b2
```

For each expanded context that is induced by the instances of targetable resource of kind `C` and its relationships given by the hierarchy, i.e. for each of: `a1` > `b1` > `c1`, `a1` > `b2` > `c1`, and `a1` > `b2` > `c2`, stack the metaresources targeting the context at any level, ordered from the most specific level (i.e. `C`) to the least specific one (i.e. `A`), applying the conflict resolution rules described in the previous subsection if necessary:

1. Pop two metaresources from the stack and combine them into one effective metaresource.
2. Push the calculated effective metaresource back into the stack.
3. Repeat until there is no more than one metaresource in the stack.

The last metaresource in each stack (if any) specifies the intended augmented behavior for the effective target resource of kind `C` within that corresponding context.

> The following diagram generalizes the described process for calculating Effective metaresources:

Reviewer 4: While it's useful to have diagrams and detailed specs like this, I'm worried that this is all sufficiently complex that we're going to end up with non-trivial divergence even among implementations that are trying to follow this spec closely. If we can find a way to get more widespread usage of [policy-machinery](https://github.com/Kuadrant/policy-machinery) and [gwctl](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gwctl), and if we can keep those projects aligned, that may be more effective at achieving consistency across the ecosystem. Does policy-machinery help with testing or validating existing policy behavior?

Author: > Does policy-machinery help with testing or validating existing policy behavior?

Short answer: yes

policy-machinery mainly helps with the structs and functions to build a topology of targetable resources, adjacent objects and policies. It provides interfaces that implementations of these types need to comply with, including of course the implementation of a merge strategy (which can be one of the default ones.) It then offers _examples_ of how to use that to calculate effective policies.

In a separate package, it offers tools for implementing an entire policy controller－define a topology based on the inferred or custom relationships between resources, watch the resources appended to a topology, update this topology to its latest, fire reconciliation workflows, with support to event subscription, and more.

> [policy-machinery](https://github.com/Kuadrant/policy-machinery) and [gwctl](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gwctl), and if we can keep those projects aligned, that may be more effective at achieving consistency across the ecosystem.

+1

#### Metaresource status

Metaresource CRDs MUST define a status stanza that allows for reporting the status of the metaresource with respect to each context the resource may apply.

The basic status conditions are:

* **Accepted**: the metaresource passed both syntactic validation by the API server and semantic validation enforced by the controller, such as whether the target objects exist.
* **Enforced**: the metaresource’s spec is guaranteed to be fully enforced, to the extent of what the controller can ensure.
* **PartiallyEnforced**: parts of the metaresource’s spec is guaranteed to be enforced, while other parts are known to have been superseded by other specs, to the extent of what the controller can ensure. The status should include details highlighting which parts of the metaresource are enforced and which parts have been superseded, with the references to all other related metaresources.
* **Overridden**: the metaresource’s spec is known to have been fully overridden by other specs. The status should include the references to the other related metaresources.

Metaresource implementations SHOULD support these basic status conditions.

#### Target object status

> Implementations of metaresources SHOULD put a condition into `status.Conditions` of any objects affected by the metaresource.

Reviewer 5: This is largely covered by "Fanout status update problems[¶](https://deploy-preview-3609--kubernetes-sigs-gateway-api.netlify.app/geps/gep-713/?h=713#fanout-status-update-problems)" so Ill resolve this

> Implementations of metaresources SHOULD put a condition into `status.Conditions` of any objects affected by the metaresource.

Reviewer 6: Note that the _intent_ of this message is just "there's a relevant Policy here", so any Policy update that did not change the set of affected objects should be a status patch no-op. (That's the only reason I thought it was okay at all).

### Policies and Policy Attachment

Often when applying a metaresource, the intent has to do with specifying *rules* that control the behavior of the targets in action. E.g., for networking resources, the augmented behavior specified by a metaresource targeting an object can relate to conditions to let traffic flow or to block traffic at particular points of the network; in a different scenario, it can describe rules to mutate the traffic while it flows through the network at the point represented by the target object.

The semantics of *applying rules to a target* characterizes these particular instances of metaresources as *policies*, thus here emerging in relation to this pattern the concept of *Policy Attachment*.

Policies are therefore a strict subset of metaresources which distinguish itself subtly from the whole on the fact that the augmented behavior described by policies resemble *conditional rules*, while the mechanism of targeting an object or set of objects (“attaching to objects”) is nonetheless exactly the same as in the general definition of metaresources.

> Without loss of generality, the very activation of the context (targets) of metaresources can be understood as the _conditions_ for the enforcement of the intended augment behavior (rules) that are specified in the metaresources, and therefore these can often be refered to as policies interchangeably.

Reviewer 3: typo in refered.  Also, in the phrase "these can often be refered...", what is "these"?  The targets or rules or something else?

```suggestion
Without loss of generality, the very activation of the context (targets) of metaresources can be understood as the _conditions_ for the enforcement of the intended augment behavior (rules) that are specified in the metaresources, and therefore these can often be refered to as policies interchangeably.
```
```suggestion
Without loss of generality, the very activation of the context (targets) of metaresources can be understood as the _conditions_ for the enforcement of the intended augment behavior (rules) that are specified in the metaresources, and therefore these can often be referred to as policies interchangeably.
```

Author: "these" == "metaresources"

    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    // Spec defines the desired state of the policy.
    Spec ColorPolicySpec `json:"spec"`

    // Status defines the current state of the policy.
    Status ColorPolicyStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
  }

  type ColorPolicySpec struct {
    // TargetRefs specify the targets of the policy by name.
    // The following kinds are supported: …
    // +listType=map
    // +listMapKey=group
    // +listMapKey=kind
    // +listMapKey=namespace
    // +listMapKey=name
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16
    TargetRefs []gatewayapiv1alpha2.NamespacedPolicyTargetReference `json:"targetRefs"`

    // rest of the spec ("spec proper")…
  }
  ```
</details>

#### Spanning behavior across relationships of a target

Because the target objects that give a metaresource context sometimes are themselves inserted into a broader context of their own, composed of other interrelated objects, the effects of a metaresource can be limited to a target object itself or span across the links between this object and other objects that the object is related to.

> E.g. – a metaresource that targets a Namespace may declare intent that affects the behavior of the namespace itself (for what concerns to the implementation of Namespaces in Kubernetes) or alternatively it can act as a means to affect the behavior of other objects that exist in the referred namespace (e.g. ConfigMaps). While in the former case, the (direct) target object is the Namespace itself, in the latter the (indirect) target is a set of objects of a different kind (e.g. ConfigMaps.)

Reviewer 3: Instead of direct and indirect, we could still use the terms associated with scope, e.g. local and global.  A global reference has sub-objects as targets, and local reference stands alone as the target.

> To avoid any ambiguity in the interpretation of the targets, metaresources MUST clearly define the extent of their effects respectively to the object kinds they target (semantics of attaching a metaresource). This is usually defined in terms of a known hierarchy of resource kinds.

Reviewer 3: Can you add the default when it isn't specified, e.g. a default of a single root without any hierarchy.

  ```go
  package color

  import (
    metav1 "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1"
    gatewayapiv1alpha2 "sigs.k8s.io/gateway-api/apis/v1alpha2"
  )

  type ColorPolicy struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    // Spec defines the desired state of the policy.
    Spec ColorPolicySpec `json:"spec"`

    // Status defines the current state of the policy.
    Status ColorPolicyStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
  }

  type ColorPolicySpec struct {
    // TargetRefs specify the targets of the policy by name.
    // The following kinds are supported: …
    // +listType=map
    // +listMapKey=group
    // +listMapKey=kind
    // +listMapKey=name
    // +listMapKey=sectionName
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16
    TargetRefs []gatewayapiv1alpha2.LocalPolicyTargetReferenceWithSectionName `json:"targetRefs"`

    // rest of the spec ("spec proper")…
  }
  ```
</details>

#### Targeting virtual types

> In some cases, one may want to apply metaresources to objects that are not actual Kubernetes kinds. An example of such, from Gateway API mesh case, would be a hypothetical need for defining a policy to "color" requests to external services. To accomplish this, implementations MAY choose to support a reference to a _virtual resource type_. E.g.:

Reviewer 3: Can you start with a definition of "virtual types".  E.g. virtual types are defined as those with a group outside of the typical Kubernetes groups.  As an alternative, I suppose these types could be called custom types.

Author: Done

```yaml
apiVersion: policies.controller.io/v1
kind: ColorPolicy
metadata:
  name: my-color-policy
spec:
  targetRef:
    group: networking.acme.io
    kind: ExternalService
    name: foo.com
  rules:
    color: blue
```

As a pattern, targeting virtual types has prior art in Kubernetes with the Role Based Access Control (RBAC), where Roles and ClusterRoles can used to specify permissions regarding any kind of resource including non-Kubernetes resources.

### Conflicting specs and Inheritance

Declaring additional specifications to objects from the outside can yield conflicts that need to be addressed in the implementation of metaresources. Multiple instances of a metaresource kind may affect an object (directly or indirectly), thus posing a possible conflict to resolve regarding which intent among the multiple metaresource specs a controller shall honor.

> In some cases, the most recent between two conflicting specs may be desired to win, whereas in other cases it might be the oldest; often the winning spec is determined by the hierarchical level (implicit or explicit) of the context which the metaresource applies, and sometimes other criteria must be adopted to resolve conflicts between metaresources ultimately affecting a same target or section of a target.

Reviewer 3: We should declare in this GEP which is the default behavior.  My vote for the default is for the more specific to override the less specific, e.g. for a policy applied to a listener to override a conflicting policy applied to its parent Gateway.

Author: Done

Meta resources follow a well-known structure that declares clearly a *target* and an *intent*.

#### Meta resources are well-structured CRDs

Meta resources are typically implemented as Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) that comply with a particular structure. This structure includes fields for specifying references to one or more other objects－called “targets“－whose behavior the instances of the meta resource intend to augment (i.e. declare additional specification), along with resource-specific fields－the “spec proper”－to describe the intended augmented behavior.

While the targets of a meta resource give the meta resource a *context*, the spec proper declares the *intent* within that context.

A typical meta resource looks like the following – example provided based on a hypothetical `ColorPolicy` kind of meta resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: policies.controller.io/v1
kind: ColorPolicy
metadata:
  name: my-color-policy
spec:
  targetRefs: ## target objects whose behaviour to augment
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
    kind: Gateway
    name: my-gateway

>   rules:      ## the "spec proper" describing the intent, i.e. color the traffic blue

Author: Done

* Decoupling concerns for targeting personas with specific functionality and configuration－ delegation of responsibilities, fine-grained RBAC.
* Decoupling responsibility over the management and implementation of the meta resources themselves.
* Avoid alternatives based on annotations which are often non-standardized, poorly documented, and generally hard to maintain.

### Examples of applications of meta resources and policies

* Specifying traffic rules for Kubernetes Services
* Configuring implementation-specific authentication features on ingress Gateways
* Delegating responsibility over parts of the configuration (e.g. auth) to other users
* Inspecting and auditing focused aspects of a resource (e.g. auth policies)

## Guide-level explanation

### Defining context: scoping intent in relation to targets

The objects targeted by a meta resource define a *context* where the *intent* that is specified in the meta resource itself is expected to be honored. This context exists in the form of other Kubernetes objects (or parts of objects) and referenced in the meta resources directly or indirectly by name or other referencing mechanisms.

#### Ways of targeting objects

> Meta resources can be designed to allow targeting objects by name (“reference by name”), using label selectors, and with or without cross-namespace references allowed. In all cases, the targets shall be declared within a `targetRefs` field within the spec of the meta resource instance.

Author: As a policy designer, you definitely need to pick _at least one_ of these ways of targeting resources, but the ones you pick must be implemented in a given way.

As for label selectors, `matchLabels` and `matchExpression`, etc, I'd say we probably should err on known Kubernetes types and tools? In this particular case, I imagine users who see `matchLabels` would expect `matchExpression` as well, and implementation-wise I don't see much why we wouldn't want to support both.

> Meta resources can be designed to allow targeting objects by name (“reference by name”), using label selectors, and with or without cross-namespace references allowed. In all cases, the targets shall be declared within a `targetRefs` field within the spec of the meta resource instance.

Author: > Istio currently has label selectors not under targetRefs. Is this violating a "MUST" or just not following a recommendedation?

I would err on "not violating" because no implementation have to support label selectors and Istio already supports name selector as part of the `targetRefs` field according to the spec. However, neither it's fully compliant IMO, if what you want to say is "Istio supports targeting by label selectors as described in GEP-713"

> Meta resources can be designed to allow targeting objects by name (“reference by name”), using label selectors, and with or without cross-namespace references allowed. In all cases, the targets shall be declared within a `targetRefs` field within the spec of the meta resource instance.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Meta resources MAY be designed using different targeting strategies, such as targeting objects by name (“reference by name”), using label selectors, and targeting with or without cross-namespace references allowed. In all cases, in order to fit within the framework described in this document, the targets MUST be declared within a `targetRefs` field within the spec of the meta resource instance.
```

How about something like this? I feel like that might be a bit clearer.

> Meta resources can be designed to allow targeting objects by name (“reference by name”), using label selectors, and with or without cross-namespace references allowed. In all cases, the targets shall be declared within a `targetRefs` field within the spec of the meta resource instance.

Author: Done as suggested by @youngnick:
- "MAY be designed using different targeting methods"
- "targets MUST be declared within a `targetRefs` field"
- "SHOULD specify Group, Version and Kind (GVK)"

> Meta resources can be designed to allow targeting objects by name (“reference by name”), using label selectors, and with or without cross-namespace references allowed. In all cases, the targets shall be declared within a `targetRefs` field within the spec of the meta resource instance.

Reviewer 5: > "targets MUST be declared within a targetRefs field"

TBH I think this makes sense but Istio isn't going to follow this for backwards compatibility reasons.

The process of calculating Effective meta resources (Effective policies) consists of walking the hierarchy of target objects, from most specific to least specific (i.e., bottom-up, from the leaves towards the roots of the DAG of target objects) or from least specific to most specific (top-down), map reducing to a single meta resource spec each pair of meta resources adjacent to each other in the hierarchy, applying at each step one of the supported merge strategies described below, until no more than one spec remains for each effective target.

Meta resource kinds that implement more than one merge strategy MUST provide fields for the instances of the meta resource to specify a chosen strategy (described in the next section). The least specific meta resource of the pair of meta resources whose specs are merged into one dictates the merge strategy to apply in such cases.

#### Conflict resolution

> If multiple meta resources target the same context, the following criteria MUST be applied in order to resolve the conflict and thus calculate the effective spec, continuing on ties:

Reviewer 5: it's a bit unclear to me why we are being prescriptive on conflict resolution here? It seems like we have previously said an implementation can make it's own choices on how to merge or not merge resources - shouldn't it be allowed to have it's own mechanics for conflict too?

Reviewer 5: The whole section at L213 seems to contradict this as well (or likely I just misunderstood) - that seems to say an implementation can make it's own conflict resolution choices, and one choice is "merge" which implies we are not doing the things listed here

Author: Implementations still get to choose.

Criteria 1 to 3 following this line establish (try to establish) the distinction between a conflict of policies at different levels of the hierarchy (e.g. xPolicy1 -> Gateway <- HTTPRoute <- xPolicy2) versus a conflict that happens at the same level (e.g. 2 xPolicy resources that target the exact same HTTPRouteRule.)

When the policies are at different levels, the merge strategy dictates how the merge will happen (or not happen). The merge strategy can be one of the "prescribed" ones or implementation-specific. To this rule, I'm adding that the higher policy controls the strategy, which I think has always been implied. E.g. if the Gateway policy says `defaults` (or nothing at all), then the merge strategy will be "gateway defaults", regardless of what the HTTPRoute policy says. The HTTPRoute policy may say `defaults` or `overrides` (or again nothing at all), and it will still be merged as gateway defaults, not because of what the HTTPRoute policy says, but because of what the Gateway policy does.

As for policies conflicting at the same level, I chose to stick with two of the existing criteria of resolving based on creation timestamp and then namespaced names, dropping only the 'overrides always beats defaults' one, which has been shown to be confusing to wrap our heads around (as I mentioned in the community call a couple weeks ago.)

I can try some different writing to make this clearer but from POV I think it's significantly more permissive now in favour of  the implementations than before. I guess the TLDR is: custom merge strategies for policies conflicting at different levels of the hierarchy if necessary and one less imposition for same level policies.

Author: > don't think we can rule out merging within the same level.

@howardjohn, I'm with you on this actually.

If we're open to dropping those criteria to resolve conflicts from the original spec,  I'm happy to rewrite this bit.

The way I originally intended was that these criteria would be used to sort the list of policy resources only, but then the folding of resources into a single effective policy spec would be by applying the merge strategy at every pair, including pair of policies at the same level.

Author: Rewritten to clarify that the merge strategy is the only thing necessary to resolve conflicts.

Thanks for spotting this @howardjohn!

3. Status of `Backend` `b2` should NOT be reported as affected by any policy.
4. Status of `ColorPolicy` `p1` must be reported as enforced.
5. Status of `ColorPolicy` `p2` must be reported as NOT enforced, due to conflict with `ColorPolicy` `p1`.

### Example 2. Defaults & Overrides

In this example, the `ColorPolicy` policy kind is defined as an instance of the Inherited class of meta resources. Instances of the `ColorPolicy` kind in this example can target resources of the `Gateway` and `Route` kinds, always aiming to augment the behavior of resources of the `Backend` kind in the hierarchy. The policies can specify either `defaults` (assumed unless specified otherwise) or `overrides`, that are always treated at the atomic level.

Given:

the following state of targetable resources:

* `g1` \> `r1` \> `b1`
* `g1` \> `r2` \> `b1`
* `g2` \> `r3` \> `b1`
* `g2` \> `r4` \> `b2`
  and the following state of `ColorPolicy` (`p`) policies, where `pX[spec]` \-\> `yX` denotes a policy `pX` attached to (“targeting”) a resource `yX`, `y` ∈ {`g`, `r`}, intending to augment with `spec` the behavior of `Backend` resources when activated via `yX`:

* `p1[color:red]` \-\> `g1`

> * `p2[color:blue]` \-\> `r1`

Author: Happy to change it to an actual arrow symbol (→), but it was supposed to render like this:

<img width="402" alt="Screenshot 2025-02-11 at 16 55 41" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/682eb282-7d7a-4a77-a501-977992c281aa" />

> * `p2[color:blue]` \-\> `r1`

Author: Changed to "→".

Hopefully it works better wherever you were trying to render it. Otherwise, please let me know. I'm sure we'll find something that does work.

In other words, the discoverability problem exists and must be addressed in light of the complexity associated with the topology of contexts induced by a set of hierarchically related resources. One should always have that topology in mind while asking questions regarding the behavior of a given resource, because just like a routing object (e.g. HTTPRoute) does not exist independently from its parent contexts (e.g. Gateways) or its children (e.g. Backends), any resource in focus may be just a part of a whole.

### Status reporting

#### Meta resource status

Meta resource CRDs should define a status stanza that allows for reporting the status of the meta resource with respect to each context the resource may apply.

> The basic status conditions are:

Reviewer 5: what does this mean? an implementation should or must have these? Or if they want similar concepts they should consider these names for consistency

Author: This basically means I'm a coward 😜 I didn't want to push for a particular closed set of resource/policy status conditions, but to take a step back and collect more feedback first.

What you see here is my take on what can be done to enhance the current proposed conditions (which only has one prescribed condition really – i.e.,`Accepted`), and that is still generic enough IMO that all implementations could consider implementing (a bold guess of mine perhaps).

Do you have an opinion on MUST, SHOULD, MAY (...want to consider adopting similar concepts)? Or even on the list of conditions itself?

Reviewer 5: In general I think for policy, given its an inherently vendor-specific concept, should probably have few, if any, MUSTs. Its not enforceable anyways (unless we have some very creative conformance tests, I guess).

I think having a set of standardized conditions that you MAY apply is likely good. That way any implementation declaring a concept like "the config is valid" will use `Accepted` vs some different terms,

Reviewer 6: I think it's worth having some things as SHOULD to indicate that they're a really good idea and if you're not going to, you need to know why.

Author: Until we have a better solution, changed to:
- Metaresource status
  - "CRDs MUST define a status stanza"
  - "implementations SHOULD support the basic status conditions"
- Target object status
  - "Implementations SHOULD put a condition"
  - "condition, if added, MUST be named according to the pattern"
  - "Implementations SHOULD use their own unique domain prefix"
  - "For objects that do not have a `status.Conditions` field […], object SHOULD instead have an annotation"

* **Accepted**: the meta resource passed both syntactic validation by the API server and semantic validation enforced by the controller, such as whether the target objects exist.
* **Enforced**: the meta resource’s spec is guaranteed to be fully enforced, to the extent of what the controller can ensure.

> * **Partially enforced**: parts of the meta resource’s spec is guaranteed to be enforced, while other parts are known to have been superseded by other specs, to the extent of what the controller can ensure. The status should include details highlighting which parts of the meta resource are enforced and which parts have been superseded, with the references to all other related meta resources.

Reviewer 5: As long as this is not a MUST then its not a problem, but this seems like it could be quite onerous to compute. For example, imagine I have a global policy and then 1000 namespaces any of which could partially conflict. Its not great to have to 'bubble up' these to the parent.

Reviewer 5: A concrete example of this in existing Gateway API is `attachedRoutes`, which is similarly complex for implementations to compute (efficiently)

* **Overridden**: the meta resource’s spec is known to have been fully overridden by other specs. The status should include the references to the other related meta resources.

> #### Target object status

Reviewer 5: can we give some examples of this? I think I understand it but not certain

Reviewer 5: A full yaml would be nice

Implementations of meta resources MUST put a condition into `status.Conditions` of any objects affected by the meta resource.

That condition MUST be named according to the pattern `<meta-resource-kind>Affected` (e.g. `colors.controller.k8s.io/ColorPolicyAffected`), and have the optional `observedGeneration` field kept up to date when the spec of the target object changes.

Implementations should use their own unique domain prefix for this condition type. Gateway API implementations, for instance, should use the same domain as in the `controllerName` field on `GatewayClass` (or some other implementation-unique domain for implementations that do not use `GatewayClass`.)

> For objects that do not have a `status.Conditions` field available (`Secret` is a good example), that object MUST instead have an annotation of `colors.controller.k8s.io/ColorPolicyAffected: true` added instead.

Reviewer 5: We cannot require an implementation to write an annotation to an object they don't own IMO. It may make sense in some cases but I cannot imagine users would be too happy with write access to secrets in most cases for example

Author: Can change it to SHOULD.

Reviewer 6: Agreed that SHOULD is better here.

> # GEP-713: Meta resources and Policy Attachment

Author: I definitely have no strong preference. "Metaresource" is not a word AFAIK, but like "metadata" eventually became one and given the importance of the term in the context here and all other reasons @youngnick has mentioned, I'm happy to accept the suggestion. Np.

* Issue: [#713](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/713)
* Status: Standard

(See status definitions [here](/geps/overview/#gep-states))

## TLDR

This GEP aims to standardize terminology and processes around using one Kubernetes object to modify the functions of one or more other objects.

> It lays out guidelines for Gateway API implementations and other stakeholders for the design and/or handling of custom “meta resources” definitions in compliance with a standard known as Policy Attachment.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
It lays out guidelines for Gateway API implementations and other stakeholders for the design and/or handling of custom “meta resource” definitions in compliance with a standard known as Policy Attachment.
```
Only need one plural here.

## Out of scope

* Define all potential meta resource and policy kinds that may be attached to resources.

## Background

When designing Gateway API, it was found a frequent need to change the behavior of objects without being able to make changes to the spec of those objects. Sometimes, this is because changing the spec of the object to hold the new piece of information is not possible (e.g., `ReferenceGrant`, from [GEP-709](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-709/), when affecting Secrets and Services), and sometimes it’s because the behavior change is intended to flow across multiple objects (see [Semantics](#semantics-why) of meta resources and [Inherited](#inherited) class of meta resources).

To put this another way, sometimes we need ways to be able to affect how an object is interpreted in the API, without representing the description of those effects inside the spec of the object. This document describes the ways to design objects to meet use cases like these.

> A new concept of “meta resource” has been introduced, a term used to describe the class of objects that _only_ augment the behavior of another Kubernetes object, regardless of what they are targeting.

Reviewer 6: I think we should avoid the passive voice here.

```suggestion
This document introduces the concept of a “meta resource”, a term used to describe the class of objects that _only_ augment the behavior of another Kubernetes object, regardless of what they are targeting.
```

While the targets of a meta resource give the meta resource a *context*, the spec proper declares the *intent* within that context.

A typical meta resource looks like the following – example provided based on a hypothetical `ColorPolicy` kind of meta resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: policies.controller.io/v1
kind: ColorPolicy
metadata:
  name: my-color-policy
spec:
  targetRefs: ## target objects whose behaviour to augment
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
    kind: Gateway
    name: my-gateway
  rules:      ## the "spec proper" describing the intent, i.e. color the traffic blue
    color: blue
```

#### Properties of meta resources

##### Targetability (“where”)

Meta resources specify one or more target resources or specific sections of resources, whose behavior the meta resource intends to augment.

##### Semantics (“why”)

Targeting a resource (or section of a resource) must be interpreted within a given semantics that is proper to the meta resource kind.

> Two different meta resource kinds that allow targeting resources of a same a given kind X may have very different semantics, not only because the purpose of the two meta resource kinds differ, but because the mechanics of calculating and applying the augment behavior for X can as well be very different between meta resource kinds.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Two different meta resource kinds that allow targeting resources of a same a given kind X may have very different semantics, not only because the purpose of the two meta resource kinds differ, but because the mechanics of calculating and applying the augmented behavior for X can as well be very different between meta resource kinds.
```

Often, the semantics of a meta resource is tightly coupled to the relationships and connections a target has with other kinds of objects, typically organized in a hierarchy of nested contexts. In this sense, targeting a given resource kind may have the semantics of spanning effect across yet other objects to which the target is related.

##### Mergeability (“how”)

Meta resources specify so-called *merge strategies* that dictate how multiple instances of the meta resource affecting a same resource (or section of a resource) should be dealt with in terms of calculating and enforcing a single set of rules specified by the meta resources.

> The merge strategies typically include strategies for dealing with conflicting and/or missing specs, such as for applying default and/or override values on the target resources.

Reviewer 6: I think it's important to note that sometimes the merge strategy may be specified in the design of the object (that is, it's a defaults policy or something), rather than in a field?

In fact, I tend to think that, if the merge strategy is listed in a field, it should be in the `status`, not the `spec`, since it's relevant info for _users_ of the Policy more than _implementers_ (who will build the merge strategy into code when handling the Policy anyway).

Reviewer 4: +1, this feels like something that belongs in status.

Reviewer 3: +1 that merge strategy may be defined in the metaresource, e.g. the API contract is only one is allowed per target, or multiple are allowed.

Author: I feel confused about the merge strategy in the `status` instead of the `spec`.

Are we talking about the metaresource's `status` and `spec`? Or the target's?

The merge strategy, if more than one is supported by the metaresource kind, is a choice of the user that declares an instance of the metaresource. How can it be in the status?

The user literally _specify_ what merge strategy to use when merging that instance of the metaresource. It should be in the `spec`, no?

Author: Added a few lines about merge strategy as a user choice or not, and reflected in the status stanza of the metaresource.

E.g., in Gateway API’s hierarchy of network resources for the ingress use case `GatewayClass` \> `Gateway` \> `HTTPRoute` \> `Backend`, a meta resource that attaches to a `GatewayClass` object, if defined as a meta resource kind ultimately to augment the behavior of `HTTPRoute` objects, affects all `Gateways` under the `GatewayClass`, as well as all `HTTPRoutes` under those `Gateways`. Any other instance of this meta resource kind targeting a lower level than the `GatewayClass` (e.g. `Gateway` or `HTTPRoute`) should be be treated as a conflict against the higher level meta resource spec, for the specific scope (“context”) of the subset of the hierarchy it attaches to. This conflict MUST be resolved according to some defined *merge strategy*.

### Declared targets versus Effective targets

A kind specified in the target reference of a meta resource can be the actual kind of object whose behavior the meta resource intends to augment or an indirection to targeting other kinds the object is hierarchically related to.

> E.g. targeting a Gateway API `Gateway` object with a meta resource can be a way to augment the behavior of the `Gateway` object itself (e.g. reconcile cloud infrastructure provider settings from the spec declared by the `Gateway` according the rules specified by the meta resource attached to the `Gateway`) or a means to augment the behavior of all `HTTPRoute` objects attached to the `Gateway` (in a way that every new `HTTPRoute` that gets created or modified so it enters the context of the `Gateway` is automatically put in the scope of the meta resource.)

Reviewer 6: I think this needs some breaking up, as it's a bit difficult to parse as it stands.
```suggestion
E.g. targeting a Gateway API `Gateway` object with a meta resource can be:
* a way to augment the behavior of the `Gateway` object itself (e.g. reconcile cloud infrastructure provider settings from the spec declared by the `Gateway` according the rules specified by the meta resource attached to the `Gateway`) or
* a means to augment the behavior of all `HTTPRoute` objects attached to the `Gateway` (in a way that every new `HTTPRoute` that gets created or modified so it enters the context of the `Gateway` is automatically put in the scope of the meta resource.)
```

> The target kinds specified in the target references of a meta resource are referred to as *Declared target* kinds. When declared targets are not equal to the actual targets augmented by the meta resource, but rather they serve as a means for reaching other levels (typically lower level) of related object kinds, these other kinds of target objects whose behavior are actually augmented by the meta resource are referred to as *Effective target* kinds.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The target kinds specified in the target references of a meta resource are referred to as *Declared target* kinds.

These are distinct from *Effective target* kinds, which are the kinds of target objects whose behaviors are actually augmented by the meta resource. That occurs when declared targets are not equal to the actual targets augmented by the meta resource, but rather serve as a means for reaching other levels (typically lower level) of related object kinds.
```
I suggest rearranging this a little to make the definitions a little closer to the start or end of sentences, which makes them easier to extract for the reader.

> ### Hierarchy of target kinds and mechanics for calculating Effective meta resources

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
### Calculating Effective target kinds using hierarchy mechanics
```

Using the term we just defined makes this a bit easier to read.

Author: Trying: "Hierarchy of target kinds and Effective metaresources", where in the text I hope it becomes clear that the mechanics of calculating the _effective metaresources_ involves using a _hierarchy of target kinds_ and correlated _effective targets_.

Reviewer 6: That's fine.

> Target kinds MUST be organized in a well-known hierarchy of target kinds, from the least specific declared target kinds to the most specific effective ones. This hierarchy shall thus induce a logical representation of the relationships between instances of target objects, in the form of a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) whose roots are the least specific objects and the leaves are the most specific ones (and ultimately the effective targets of the meta resources).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Target kinds MUST be organized in a well-known hierarchy of target kinds, from the least specific target kinds to the most specific ones, across both declared and effective target kinds.

The best way to visualize this hierarchy is in the form of a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) whose roots are the least specific objects and the leaves are the most specific ones (and ultimately the effective targets of the meta resources).
```
Simplifying the text a bit again.

Author: We must be careful not to conflate two concepts here: the hierarchy of target kinds and the DAG of instances (which is induced by the hierarchy.)

The hierarchy you define once for your domain, whereas the DAG maps a given state in a given moment in time.

Author: Tried something in between original and suggestion. I hope that works.

Reviewer 6: That's better, thanks.

> The hierarchy of target kinds, as well as the logical representation of hierarchical relationships between instances of target objects, serve as a map for orderly resolving meta resource specs for each combinatorial context that is ultimately affected by the meta resources (i.e. for each Effective target). This process corresponds to resolving the intended augmented behavior that is collectively described by the set of meta resource specs in the context. The spec that summarizes the intended augmented behavior for a given context is referred to as the *Effective meta resource* (or *Effective policy*).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Using a DAG to represent the hierarchy of target kinds makes calculation of the Effective set much easier, and ensures that all the relevant objects are represented in the calculation of the settings for each object - referred to as the *Effective meta resource* (or *Effective policy*).
```

The process of calculating Effective meta resources (Effective policies) consists of walking the hierarchy of target objects, from most specific to least specific (i.e., bottom-up, from the leaves towards the roots of the DAG of target objects) or from least specific to most specific (top-down), map reducing to a single meta resource spec each pair of meta resources adjacent to each other in the hierarchy, applying at each step one of the supported merge strategies described below, until no more than one spec remains for each effective target.

Meta resource kinds that implement more than one merge strategy MUST provide fields for the instances of the meta resource to specify a chosen strategy (described in the next section). The least specific meta resource of the pair of meta resources whose specs are merged into one dictates the merge strategy to apply in such cases.

#### Conflict resolution

> If multiple meta resources target the same context, this is considered to be a conflict.

Reviewer 6: We need to define "context"  again here, I think. (I'd forgotten the definition by the time I got to this part).
```suggestion
If multiple meta resources target the same context (that is, multiple instances of the same or similar policies acting on the same hierarchy have an effective target of the same object), this is considered to be a conflict.
```

Author: "same", yes; "similar", not a good idea IMO. I think the behavior for different kinds of policies should be undefined.

Reviewer 6: I'm okay with removing "or similar", but I think that if we're going to leave this as undefined in some cases, we need to be specific in the ones where we _do_ need to have opinions:

* For Gateway API Policy objects included in the specification, in the case of intent conflict with some other Policy on Gateway API objects, the Gateway API Policy must take precedence.
* For implementation specific Policy objects that affect the same properties across multiple implementations, it's up to the implementations to define behavior. If they don't then the behavior is, necessarily, undefined and could produce differing outcomes depending on unknown factors.

In other words, this is a terrible idea and users should try not to use multiple Policy objects that affect the same things.

> Conflicts must be resolved by applying a defined *merge strategy* (see further definition in the next section), where the meta resource considered higher between two conflicting specs dictates the merge strategy according to which the conflict must be resolved, defaulting to the lower spec (more specific) beating the higher one if not specified otherwise.

Author: Yes, but I happen to find the suggested text more confusing than the original.

"least-specific-wins" and "more-specific-wins" have different subjects in the sentences, and therefore I would phrase it differently to avoid confusion.

A merge strategy is a function that takes as input 2 specs and outputs 1.

One thing is determining the merge strategy. When resolving a conflict posed by 2 metaresources, the least specific metaresource among the two dictates the merge strategy that will be used to solve the conflict, i.e. the function that will take both metaresource specs as input. It's always the least specific metaresource that determines it.

The determined merge strategy can be a merge strategy that resolves to "least-specific-wins" or "more-specific-wins" (and occasionally to things more sophisticated than that, like actual merges).

If the least specific metaresource does not specify a merge strategy, then the merge strategy used to resolve the conflict is "more-specific-wins".

> Conflicts must be resolved by applying a defined *merge strategy* (see further definition in the next section), where the meta resource considered higher between two conflicting specs dictates the merge strategy according to which the conflict must be resolved, defaulting to the lower spec (more specific) beating the higher one if not specified otherwise.

Author: Rephrased a bit to break down as suggested but trying to avoid overloading terminology.

> The following criteria MUST be applied to determine which meta resources are higher or lower and thus infer which merge strategy to apply to calculate the effective spec, continuing on ties:

Reviewer 6: To calculate which objects in a hierarchy are higher or lower for merge strategies, use the following rules, continuing on ties:

Author: Rephrased along these lines, tho without conflating target and metaresource into the one thing.

> 1. Between two meta resources at different levels of the hierarchy, the one attached higher in the hierarchy MUST be considered higher than the one attached lower in the hierarchy.
> 2. Between two meta resources at the same level of the hierarchy, the older meta resource based on creation timestamp MUST be considered higher than the newer one.
> 3. Between two meta resources at the same level of the hierarchy and identical creation timestamps, the meta resource appearing first in alphabetical order by `{namespace}/{name}` MUST be considered higher than the other.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1. Between two meta resources at different levels of the hierarchy, the one attached higher wins.
2. Between two meta resources at the same level of the hierarchy, the older meta resource based on creation timestamp wins.
3. Between two meta resources at the same level of the hierarchy and identical creation timestamps, the meta resource appearing first in alphabetical order by `{namespace}/{name}` wins.
```

Author: Done with minor addition, again to avoid confusion between choosing a merge strategy versus what spec ends up winning according to the merge strategy that was chosen.

#### Abstract process for calculating Effective meta resources

> The following is a description of an abstract process for calculating effective meta resources.

Author: Added a couple of them.

* Provide a way to distinguish between required and default values for all metaresource API implementations.
* Enable Policy Attachment at all relevant scopes in Gateway API, including Gateways, Routes, Backends, along with how values should flow across a hierarchy if necessary.
* Ensure the Policy Attachment specification is generic and forward thinking enough that it could be easily adapted to other grouping mechanisms like Namespaces in the future.
* Provide a means of attachment that works for both ingress and mesh implementations of Gateway API.
* Provide a consistent specification that will ensure familiarity between both included and implementation-specific metaresources so they can both be interpreted the same way.
* Provide a reference pattern to other implementations of metaresource and policy APIs outside of Gateway API, that are based on similar concepts (i.e., augmenting the behavior of other Kubernetes objects, attachment points, nested contexts and inheritance, Defaults & Overrides, etc.)

## Out of scope

* Define all potential metaresource and policy kinds that may be attached to resources.

## Background

> When designing Gateway API, it was found a frequent need to change the behavior of objects without being able to make changes to the spec of those objects. Sometimes, this is because changing the spec of the object to hold the new piece of information is not possible (e.g., `ReferenceGrant`, from [GEP-709](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-709/), when affecting Secrets and Services), and sometimes it’s because the behavior change is intended to flow across multiple objects (see [Semantics](#semantics-why) of metaresources and [Inherited](#inherited) class of metaresources).

Reviewer 6: Should be either "we found" or "it was found that". "We found" is better because passive voice is harder to read.

Author: Rephrased. Thanks!

The following diagram generalizes the described process for calculating Effective metaresources:

```mermaid
---
config:
  look: handDrawn
  theme: neutral
---
graph
  A[Start: Given a DAG of target objects and set of metaresources] --> sub
  sub --> L["Output result: mapping of each leaf of the DAG to its corresponding Effective metaresource (if any)"]

  subgraph sub["For each path of target objects in the DAG"]
    C["Order metaresources affecting the objects in the path from most specific to least specific, applying conflict resolution if necessary"] --> D["Push ordered metaresources to stack (least specific metaresource on top of the stack)"]
    D --> E{More than one metaresource in stack?}
    E -- Yes --> F[Pop two metaresources _mA_ and _mB_]
    F --> G[Combine _mA_ and _mB_ into metaresource _mX_ applying the merge strategy dictated by _mA_]
    G --> H[Make the merge strategy specified by _mB_ the merge strategy of _mX_]
    H --> I[Push _mX_ back into the stack]
    I --> E
    E -- No --> J[Map the end of the path to a single metaresource remaining in the stack or none]
  end
```

> For the exemplified instances, the expected outcome of the process is:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In the example above, the expected outcome of the process is:
```
Less syllables == easier to parse, generally.

Moreover, a `ColorPolicy` metaresource kind (or “policy kind”, equivalently) is defined however with variations in its semantics across examples to accommodate for each case. Instances of the `ColorPolicy` kind (denoted “`pX[spec]`” and referred to simply as “policies”) may target one or more kinds of targetable resources, depending on each example. A policy represents an intent to “color” the network traffic that flows through the portion of the network corresponding to the target with a given color or color set that is specified in the policy.

### Example 1. Direct Policy

In this example, the `ColorPolicy` policy kind is defined as an instance of the Direct class of metaresources. Instances of the `ColorPolicy` kind in this example can only target `Backend` resources.

Given:

the following state of targetable resources:

* `g1` > `r1` > `b1`
* `g1` > `r2` > `b2`
  and the following state of `ColorPolicy` (`p`) policies, where `pX[spec]` → `bX` denotes a policy `pX` attached to (“targeting”) a `Backend` resource `bX`, intending to augment `bX`‘s behavior with `spec`:

* `p1[color:red]` → `b1`

> * `p2[color:blue]` → `b1` (conflicting policy, `p2.creationTimestamp` > `p1.creationTimestamp`)

Reviewer 6: Good example, but this should be a diagram either in addition to or instead of this description. In reading this, I personally need to make a diagram either in my head or on paper anyway, so including diagrams here would at least make it quicker for _me_ to parse these examples.

Author: Done. Please let me know if the one I added works for you.

4. Status of `ColorPolicy` `p1` must be reported as enforced.
5. Status of `ColorPolicy` `p2` must be reported as NOT enforced, due to conflict with `ColorPolicy` `p1`.

### Example 2. Defaults & Overrides

In this example, the `ColorPolicy` policy kind is defined as an instance of the Inherited class of metaresources. Instances of the `ColorPolicy` kind in this example can target resources of the `Gateway` and `Route` kinds, always aiming to augment the behavior of resources of the `Backend` kind in the hierarchy. The policies can specify either `defaults` (assumed unless specified otherwise) or `overrides`, that are always treated at the atomic level.

Given:

the following state of targetable resources:

* `g1` > `r1` > `b1`
* `g1` > `r2` > `b1`
* `g2` > `r3` > `b1`
* `g2` > `r4` > `b2`
  and the following state of `ColorPolicy` (`p`) policies, where `pX[spec]` → `yX` denotes a policy `pX` attached to (“targeting”) a resource `yX`, `y` ∈ {`g`, `r`}, intending to augment with `spec` the behavior of `Backend` resources when activated via `yX`:

* `p1[color:red]` → `g1`
* `p2[color:blue]` → `r1`
* `p3[overrides:{color:yellow}]` → `g2`

> * `p4[color:green]` → `r4`

Reviewer 6: Another diagram here please.

Author: Done

In this example, the `ColorPolicy` policy kind is defined as an instance of the Inherited class of metaresources. Instances of the `ColorPolicy` kind in this example can target resources of the `Gateway` and `Route` kinds, always aiming to augment the behavior of resources of the `Backend` kind in the hierarchy. The policies can specify either `defaults` (assumed unless specified otherwise) or `overrides`. Moreover, policies specify a complex color scheme composed of `dark` and `light` entries, as well as a `strategy` field to specify one of two supported merge strategies, `atomic` (assumed unless specified otherwise) or `patch`.

Given:

the following state of targetable resources:

* `g1` > `r1` > `b1`
* `g1` > `r2` > `b1`
* `g2` > `r3` > `b1`
* `g2` > `r4` > `b2`
  and the following state of `ColorPolicy` (`p`) policies, where `pX[spec]` → `yX` denotes a policy `pX` attached to (“targeting”) a resource `yX`, `y` ∈ {`g`, `r`}, intending to augment with `spec` the behavior of `Backend` resources when activated via `yX`:

* `p1[colors:{dark:brown,light:red},strategy:atomic]` → `g1`
* `p2[colors:{light:blue}]` → `r1`
* `p3[overrides:{colors:{light:yellow},strategy:patch}]` → `g2`

> * `p4[colors:{dark:olive,light:green}]` → `r4`

Reviewer 6: Diagram please.

Author: Done

This document introduces the concept of a “metaresource”, a term used to describe the class of objects that _only_ augment the behavior of another Kubernetes object, regardless of what they are targeting.

“Meta” here is used in its Greek sense of “more comprehensive” or “transcending”, and “resource” rather than “object” because “metaresource” is more pronounceable than “meta object”.

After a few iterations of Gateway API experimenting with this pattern－both, with its own common kinds of metaresources such as the `BackendTLSPolicy` and `BackendLBPolicy`, as well as via multiple implementation-specific kinds of metaresources (see examples of [current use of metaresources](#current-use-of-metaresources))－ and rounds of discussion such as the one at [kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions#2927](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/2927), the pattern has been enhanced to its current form.

### User stories

> - [Ana](../../concepts/roles-and-personas.md#ana) or [Chihiro](../../concepts/roles-and-personas.md#chiriro) would like to specify some new behavior for a standard Kubernetes resource, but that resource doesn't have a way to specify the behavior and neither Ana nor Chihiro can modify it.

Reviewer 7: Ah my mistake, this is working, I guess instead just spell correct in Chihiro's anchor:

```suggestion
- [Ana](../../concepts/roles-and-personas.md#ana) or [Chihiro](../../concepts/roles-and-personas.md#chihiro) would like to specify some new behavior for a standard Kubernetes resource, but that resource doesn't have a way to specify the behavior and neither Ana nor Chihiro can modify it.
```

> - [Ana](../../concepts/roles-and-personas.md#ana) or [Chihiro](../../concepts/roles-and-personas.md#chiriro) would like to specify some new behavior for a standard Kubernetes resource, but that resource doesn't have a way to specify the behavior and neither Ana nor Chihiro can modify it.

Reviewer 7: Ah my mistake this does work, perhaps instead spelling in Chihiro's anchor:
```suggestion
- [Ana](../../concepts/roles-and-personas.md#ana) or [Chihiro](../../concepts/roles-and-personas.md#Chihiro) would like to specify some new behavior for a standard Kubernetes resource, but that resource doesn't have a way to specify the behavior and neither Ana nor Chihiro can modify it.
```

> - [Ana](../../concepts/roles-and-personas.md#ana) or [Chihiro](../../concepts/roles-and-personas.md#chiriro) would like to specify some new behavior for a standard Kubernetes resource, but that resource doesn't have a way to specify the behavior and neither Ana nor Chihiro can modify it.

Author: https://github.com/guicassolato/gateway-api/blob/748d3c093db3c05fa9b3d61cf737adbcd2a6ebed/site-src/concepts/roles-and-personas.md?plain=1#L47

    // +listMapKey=sectionName
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16
    TargetRefs []gatewayapiv1alpha2.LocalPolicyTargetReferenceWithSectionName `json:"targetRefs"`

    // rest of the spec ("spec proper")…
  }
  ```
</details>

##### Targeting virtual types

_Virtual types_ are defined as those with a group unkown by the Kubernetes API server. They can be used to apply metaresources to objects that are not actual Kubernetes resources nor Kubernetes custom resources. Rather, virtual types have a meaning for the metaresource controller responsible for implementing the metaresource.

An example of such, from Gateway API mesh case, would be a hypothetical need for defining a policy to "color requests" to external services. To accomplish this, implementations MAY choose to support a reference to a virtual resource type `ExternalService`, unknown by the Kuberentes API server but known by the metaresource controller. E.g.:

```yaml
apiVersion: policies.controller.io/v1
kind: ColorPolicy
metadata:
  name: my-color-policy
spec:
  targetRef:
    group: networking.acme.io
    kind: ExternalService
    name: foo.com
  color: blue
```

> As a pattern, targeting virtual types has prior art in Kubernetes with the Role Based Access Control (RBAC), where Roles and ClusterRoles can used to specify permissions regarding any kind of resource including non-Kubernetes resources.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
As a pattern, targeting virtual types has prior art in Kubernetes with the Role Based Access Control (RBAC), where Roles and ClusterRoles can be used to specify permissions regarding any kind of resource including non-Kubernetes resources.
```

### Scoping the intent

> The targets of a metaresource must be interpreted within a given semantics that is proper to the metaresource kind. Sometimes the declared targets define the direct scope of application of the metaresource. Inversily, depending on the metaresource kind, the targets can also represent indirections to the actual scope of application of the metaresource.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The targets of a metaresource must be interpreted within a given semantics that is proper to the metaresource kind. Sometimes the declared targets define the direct scope of application of the metaresource. Inversely, depending on the metaresource kind, the targets can also represent indirections to the actual scope of application of the metaresource.
```

#### Spanning behavior across relationships of a target

Often, the semantics of scoping a metaresource is tightly related to the connections the target kind has with other kinds of objects. In this scenario, targeting a given resource kind may have the semantics of spanning effect across these other objects to which the target is related.

Typically, the relationships between direct and indirect target kinds are organized in a _hierarchy of nested contexts_.

An example of such is a metaresource that targets a Namespace. Depending on the design of the metaresource kind, the metaresource object may declare intent to affect the behavior of the namespace itself (for what concerns to the implementation of Namespaces in Kubernetes) or alternatively it can act as a means to affect the behavior of other objects that exist in the referred namespace (e.g. ConfigMaps). While in the former case, the (direct) target object is the Namespace itself, in the latter the (indirect) target is a set of objects of a different kind (e.g. ConfigMaps.)

Another example of this semantic difference in the context of Gateway API objects is a metaresource that targets the `Gateway` kind, which can be:

> * a way to augment the behavior of the `Gateway` object itself (e.g. reconcile cloud infrastructure provider settings from the spec declared by the `Gateway` according the rules specified by the metaresource attached to the `Gateway`) or

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* a way to augment the behavior of the `Gateway` object itself (e.g. reconcile cloud infrastructure provider settings from the spec declared by the `Gateway` according to the rules specified by the metaresource attached to the `Gateway`) or
```

These are distinct from *Effective target* kinds, which are the kinds of target objects whose behaviors are actually augmented by the metaresource. That occurs when declared targets are not equal to the actual targets augmented by the metaresource, but rather serve as a means for reaching other levels (typically lower level) of a hierarchy of related object kinds ("hierarchy of nested contexts").

To avoid ambiguity in the interpretation of the targets, metaresource designs MUST clearly define the extent of the effects of the metaresource respectively to the object kinds they can target (semantics of scoping a metaresource). This can be done via documentation and it typically refers to a known hierarchy of resource kinds.

### Conflicting specs, Inheritance, Merge strategies, and Effective metaresources

Declaring additional specifications to objects from the outside can yield conflicts that need to be addressed in the implementation of metaresources. Multiple instances of a metaresource kind may affect an object (directly or indirectly), thus posing a possible conflict to resolve regarding which intent among the multiple metaresource specs a controller shall honor.

> In some cases, the most recent between two conflicting specs may be desired to win, whereas in other cases it might be the oldest. Often, the winning spec is determined by the hierarchical level within the scope the metaresource applies, and sometimes other criteria must be adopted to resolve conflicts between metaresources ultimately affecting a same target.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
In some cases, the most recent between two conflicting specs may be desired to win, whereas in other cases it might be the oldest. Often, the winning spec is determined by the hierarchical level within the scope the metaresource applies, and sometimes other criteria must be adopted to resolve conflicts between metaresources ultimately affecting the same target.
```

#### Hierarchy of target kinds

Metaresource CRDs MUST clearly define the hierarchy of target resources they have effects upon, as well as the [semantics](#scoping-the-intent) of targeting each kind in this hierarchy.

The best way to visualize this hierarchy－and therefore the instances of objects organized by the hierarchy－is in the form of a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) whose roots are the least specific objects and the leaves are the most specific ones (and ultimately the effective targets of the metaresources). Using a DAG to represent the hierarchy of effective targets ensures that all the relevant objects are represented, and makes the calculation of corresponding combinatorial specs much easier.

> Lower levels in the hierarchy (e.g., more specific kinds) *inherit* the definitions applied at the higher levels (e.g. less specific kinds), in such a way that higher level rules may be understood as having an “umbrella effect” over everything under that level.

Reviewer 8: The phrasing of more/less specific objects is quite confusing. Perhaps defining a term to convey their position in the config hierarchy would be clearer.

Author: Rather than changing the terminology, I've added a sentence elaborating on the idea of being higher/lower in the hierarchy. I hope it helps clarify.

> E.g., given the Gateway API’s hierarchy of network resources for the ingress use case `GatewayClass` > `Gateway` > `HTTPRoute` > `Backend`. A metaresource that attaches to a `GatewayClass` object, if defined as a metaresource kind ultimately to augment the behavior of `HTTPRoute` objects, affects all `Gateways` under the `GatewayClass`, as well as all `HTTPRoutes` under those `Gateways`. Any other instance of this metaresource kind targeting a lower level than the `GatewayClass` (e.g. `Gateway` or `HTTPRoute`, assuming it's supported) should be be treated as a conflict against the higher level metaresource spec in the specific scope that is rooted at the lower level target, i.e., for the subset of the topology that is afftected by both metaresources.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
E.g., given the Gateway API’s hierarchy of network resources for the ingress use case `GatewayClass` > `Gateway` > `HTTPRoute` > `Backend`. A metaresource that attaches to a `GatewayClass` object, if defined as a metaresource kind ultimately to augment the behavior of `HTTPRoute` objects, affects all `Gateways` under the `GatewayClass`, as well as all `HTTPRoutes` under those `Gateways`. Any other instance of this metaresource kind targeting a lower level than the `GatewayClass` (e.g. `Gateway` or `HTTPRoute`, assuming it's supported) should be treated as a conflict against the higher level metaresource spec in the specific scope that is rooted at the lower level target, i.e., for the subset of the topology that is afftected by both metaresources.
```

The following subsections define a set of rules to arrange metaresources for conflict resolution, as well as an abstract process to calculate effective metaresources.

#### Conflict resolution rules

If multiple metaresources have the same scope (that is, multiple instances of the same metaresource kind affect the same effective target), this is considered to be a conflict.

To determine which metaresources attached to objects in a hierarchy are higher or lower, use the following rules, continuing on ties:
1. Between two metaresources at different levels of the hierarchy, the one attached higher wins (i.e. dictates the merge strategy to use to resolve the conflict).
2. Between two metaresources at the same level of the hierarchy, the older metaresource based on creation timestamp wins.
3. Between two metaresources at the same level of the hierarchy and identical creation timestamps, the metaresource appearing first in alphabetical order by `{namespace}/{name}` wins.

> A metaresource winning over another means this metaresource dictates the merge strategy to apply.

Reviewer 8: Please move this above L460. It's important to define what "winning" means before going into the conflict resolution specifics.

#### Merge strategies

A _merge strategy_ is a function that receives two conflicting specs and returns one.

There are 3 *basic merge strategies*:
* **None:** the metaresource with the oldest creation timestamp that is attached to a target wins, while all the other metaresources attached to the same target are rejected (`Accepted` status condition set to false).
* **Defaults:** more specific specs beats less specific ones.

> * **Overrides:** less specific specs beats more specific ones.

Reviewer 8: A bit confusing as the value doesn't convey the meaning. Perhaps BottomUp/TopDown, or a value contextualizing the hierarchy is less ambiguous.

Author: The Defaults and Overrides terminology has been employed since the early beginnings of inherited policies in Gateway API. I'm afraid changing this now can lead to even more confusion.

"Bottom-up" and "Top-down" could also clash with the description of the algorithm to calculate effective metaresources, where these terms are employed to describe how one should navigate a path in the hierarchical tree.

Reviewer 8: > The Defaults and Overrides terminology has been employed since the early beginnings of inherited policies in Gateway API. I'm afraid changing this now can lead to even more confusion.

I understand, but that doesn't make it less confusing. The previous GEP was rejected so we should do our best to avoid ambiguity in terminology this time.

Author: We really appreciate the input, @shashankram. And I guess if we can find something better than "defaults" and "overrides" to convey how metaresource/policy rules are applied throughout the hierarchy, I personally think that would be a good addition.

I have to say though that this terminology has so far been well assimilated. This doesn't exclude your criticism of course. I may very well be living in a bubble myself where these words are generally understood, with one exception I will give you: a _default_ value that is specified at a higher, less specific level, in the DAG (i.e. at a node that is closer to the root, including at the root itself) and that is _replaced/superseded_ with a value specified at a lower, more specific level (i.e. at a node that is closer to the leaves, including at a leaf itself) is often described as "_overridden_ at a lower level". I personally find this confusing with otherwise a proper _override_ strategy, i.e., the one you where specify at the less specific level and that yet wins over anything specified at the more specific ones. I made sure to avoid (at least) this confusion in the text.

Other than this, I may need some additional input here to decide how to best move forward. Perhaps @youngnick or @robscott could shine a light.

<br/>

In time and to be clear, the previous GEP was never rejected. It is actually pretty much alive (as a Memorandum.) We can argue whether "memorandum" is confusing or not for something that is "pretty much alive", but that'd be another conversation 😜

Reviewer 8: > I have to say though that this terminology has so far been well assimilated

Fair enough

* **Atomic spec:** the spec of the metaresource is treated as atomic, i.e., either one spec wins or another, but 2 specs are never mixed into a composition of specs. This MUST be the default atomicity applied if not specified otherwise.
* **Scalar values (“Patch”):** the specs of 2 metaresources are merged into one by applying the winning spec (according to semantics dictated by the base merge strategy, i.e., the more specific if Defaults or the less specific one if Overrides) over the other spec, in a JSON patch operation.
* **\<Custom>:** the spec of 2 metaresources are mixed into a composition of both specs, following a custom merge algorithm specified by the metaresource or policy kind.

The final set of *merge strategies* therefore supported by a metaresource CRD (base merge strategy \+ atomicity level) is any subset of the following, where \<Custom> is implementation-specific:
* None
* Atomic Defaults
* Atomic Overrides
* Patch Defaults
* Patch Overrides
* \<Custom> Defaults
* \<Custom> Overrides

Metaresource kinds MAY opt to implement any of these strategies, including multiple strategies.

> Metaresource kinds that do not specify any merge strategy and only support targeting a single kind (with Declared target = Effective target), by default MUST implement the **None** merge strategy. (See the definition of [Direct](#direct) class of metarsources.)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Metaresource kinds that do not specify any merge strategy and only support targeting a single kind (with Declared target = Effective target), by default MUST implement the **None** merge strategy. (See the definition of [Direct](#direct) class of metaresources.)
```

Metaresource kinds that do not specify any merge strategy and support targeting multiple effective kinds, by default MUST implement the **Atomic Defaults** merge strategy.

Metaresource kinds that implement more than one merge strategy MUST define a clear structure for the instances of metaresource to specify which of the supported strategies to apply. Instances of these metaresources MUST NOT be allowed to declare more than one merge strategy at a time, but only one of the supported strategies. If no merge strategy is specified by a given instance of the metaresource, the **Atomic Defaults** merge strategy MUST be assumed.

A pattern known to be adopted by metaresource CRDs that support multiple merge strategies is the definition of a `strategy` field in the metaresource spec for the instances to specify the exact strategy to apply.

> Metaresource implementations SHOULD reflect in the `status` stanza of the metaresources somehow the applied merge strategies altering the effectiveness of the metaresource spec, if possible considering all the different scopes targeted by the metaresource－i.e., if metaresources is being enforced or overridden, partially or completely. (See [Metaresource status](#metaresource-status) section for details.)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Metaresource implementations SHOULD reflect in the `status` stanza of the metaresources how the applied merge strategies are altering the effectiveness of the metaresource spec, if possible considering all the different scopes targeted by the metaresource－i.e., if metaresources are being enforced or overridden, partially or completely. (See [Metaresource status](#metaresource-status) section for details.)
```

* Issue: [#713](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/713)
* Status: Memorandum

(See status definitions [here](/geps/overview/#gep-states))

## TLDR

This GEP aims to standardize terminology and processes around "metaresources", i.e., using one Kubernetes object to modify the functions of one or more other objects.

It lays out guidelines for Gateway API implementations and other stakeholders for the design and/or handling of custom “metaresource” definitions in compliance with a pattern known as Policy Attachment.

!!! warning
    This GEP specifies a _pattern_, not an API field or new object. It defines some terms, including _Metaresource_, _Policies_ and _Policy Attachment_, and their related concepts.

!!! danger

>     This pattern is so far agreed upon only by Gateway API implementers who were in need of an immediate solution and didn't want all their solutions to be completely different and disparate, but does not have wide agreement or review from the rest of Kubernetes (particularly API Machinery).

Author: It's a rather tacit agreement. I left a list of all known implementations currently doing Policy Attachment at the end of the GEP. I can't tell for sure which ones participated in the early beginning of the pattern, but I dare to say the ones actively maintaining policy kinds with `targetRefs` stanza are in agreement.

All [risks and caveats](#tldr) considered, these are in general a few reasons for using metaresources over another (possibly more direct) way to modify the spec (“augment the behavior”) of an object:

* Extending otherwise stable APIs – e.g. to specify additional network settings for the Kubernetes Service object.
* Defining implementation-specific functionalities for otherwise common APIs－e.g. to specify implementation-specific behavior for Gateway API HTTPRoute objects.
* Decoupling concerns for targeting personas with specific functionality and configuration－delegation of responsibilities, fine-grained RBAC, etc.
* Decoupling responsibility over the management and implementation of the metaresources themselves.
* Avoid alternatives based on annotations which are often non-standardized, poorly documented, and generally hard to maintain, in favor of proper, expressive APIs (self-documenting intents) instead.

### Definitions

> - _**Metaresource**_: a resource that augments the behavior of another resource without modifying the definition of the resource. Metaresources MUST clearly define a _target_ and an _intent_ as defined in this GEP, and MUST clearly communicate status about whether the augmentation is happening or not.

Author: We've been back and forth on this one, but attending to [requests](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3609#discussion_r1951924338) it was decided to spell it as a single word. Hence https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3609/commits/80d821211a92290b829ddd20bd55fe1c79e71826.

> - _**Metaresource**_: a resource that augments the behavior of another resource without modifying the definition of the resource. Metaresources MUST clearly define a _target_ and an _intent_ as defined in this GEP, and MUST clearly communicate status about whether the augmentation is happening or not.

Reviewer 8: If this needs to be a single word, I would call this MetaResource not Metaresource for the reason mentioned above. Metaresource reads poor and the name stutters.

  type ColorPolicy struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    // Spec defines the desired state of the policy.
    Spec ColorPolicySpec `json:"spec"`

    // Status defines the current state of the policy.
    Status ColorPolicyStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
  }

  type ColorPolicySpec struct {
    // TargetRefs specify the targets of the policy by name.
    // The following kinds are supported: …
    // +listType=map
    // +listMapKey=group
    // +listMapKey=kind
    // +listMapKey=name
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16
    TargetRefs []gatewayapiv1alpha2.LocalPolicyTargetReference `json:"targetRefs"`

    // rest of the spec ("spec proper")…
  }
  ```
</details>

##### Label selectors

The target reference includes the label selectors used to select a set of objects whose behavior to augment. E.g.:

```yaml
apiVersion: policies.controller.io/v1
kind: ColorPolicy
metadata:
  name: my-color-policy
spec:
  targetRefs:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
    kind: Gateway
    selector: ## label selectors to a set of objects of the Gateway kind
      matchLabels:

>         env: production

Reviewer 8: Would this still be a local namespace selector?

Author: It's really unspecified. However, given that cross-namespace refs are only defined/introduced in the next subsection, I understand it's implied that, by default, we mean labels in the same namespace, just like the definition of targeting by name before that makes no reference to namespaces.

Another way to put is: same namespace versus cross-namespace refs are orthogonal to referencing by name or by labels.

Reviewer 8: How is it orthogonal? The spec should define whether the label selector is within the local namespace or not.

    // +listType=map
    // +listMapKey=group
    // +listMapKey=kind
    // +listMapKey=namespace
    // +listMapKey=name
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16
    TargetRefs []gatewayapiv1alpha2.NamespacedPolicyTargetReference `json:"targetRefs"`

    // rest of the spec ("spec proper")…
  }
  ```
</details>

##### Targeting sections of an object

Metaresource CRDs can offer the option to target a section of an object whose spec defines sections uniquely identifiable by name. These metaresources typically include a field `spec.targetRefs.sectionName` that can be used along with compatible kinds.

E.g. – a metaresource that specifies additional behaviour for a given listener of a Gateway API Gateway object, though not for all listeners of the Gateway, MUST (i) require the Gateway listener to be uniquely named and (ii) provide the `sectionName` field of target reference with the name of the targeted listener.

```yaml
apiVersion: policies.controller.io/v1
kind: ColorPolicy
metadata:
  name: my-color-policy
spec:
  targetRefs:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
    kind: Gateway
    name: my-gateway

>     sectionName: https ## unique name of a listener specified in the object of Gateway kind

Author: I think this will be necessary at some point for sure. I miss the details that first motivated the current, somewhat simpler approach, based only on _name_ and no section _kind/type_.

Maybe @robscott can refresh my mind.

>     sectionName: https ## unique name of a listener specified in the object of Gateway kind

Reviewer 6: The purpose of using `sectionName` here rather than anything is simply that it meant that it can be used across many objects - the `listTypeMap` pattern of a list of `name`d subobjects is a common and recommended pattern across Kubernetes, so this is designed to use that.

It does require that there is only one relevant `listTypeMap` in the targeted resource, and it has some form of `name` field.

Typically, the relationships between direct and indirect target kinds are organized in a _hierarchy of nested contexts_.

An example of such is a metaresource that targets a Namespace. Depending on the design of the metaresource kind, the metaresource object may declare intent to affect the behavior of the namespace itself (for what concerns to the implementation of Namespaces in Kubernetes) or alternatively it can act as a means to affect the behavior of other objects that exist in the referred namespace (e.g. ConfigMaps). While in the former case, the (direct) target object is the Namespace itself, in the latter the (indirect) target is a set of objects of a different kind (e.g. ConfigMaps.)

Another example of this semantic difference in the context of Gateway API objects is a metaresource that targets the `Gateway` kind, which can be:
* a way to augment the behavior of the `Gateway` object itself (e.g. reconcile cloud infrastructure provider settings from the spec declared by the `Gateway` according to the rules specified by the metaresource attached to the `Gateway`) or

> * a means to augment the behavior of all `HTTPRoute` objects attached to the `Gateway` (in a way that every new `HTTPRoute` that gets created or modified so it enters the context of the `Gateway` is automatically put in the scope of the metaresource.)

Author: It really depends on the purpose of the metaresource/policy, whether it is described as an API to specify settings for one kind of object or another (e.g. Gateway settings vs. Route settings), but, in general, that's literally how every Inherited Policy I'm aware of works today.

I can point you to Kuadrant's kind of policies as an example:
- [DNSPolicy](https://docs.kuadrant.io/1.1.x/kuadrant-operator/doc/overviews/dns/) and [TLSPolicy](https://docs.kuadrant.io/1.1.x/kuadrant-operator/doc/overviews/tls/) are for specifying gateway settings. These kinds of policy do not depend on what's specified in the routes and essentially affect only the gateway connectivity and configuration.
- [AuthPolicy](https://docs.kuadrant.io/1.1.x/kuadrant-operator/doc/overviews/auth/) and [RateLimitPolicy](https://docs.kuadrant.io/1.1.x/kuadrant-operator/doc/overviews/rate-limiting/) can target Gateways or HTTPRoutes. Ultimately, these kinds of policies affect HTTPRoutes always, while targeting a Gateway is:
  1. a shortcut to not have to target each HTTPRoute under the Gateway individually; at the same time,
  2. a way to scope the policy only for traffic that hitting the HTTPRoutes from that one targeted Gateway an no other parent of the route.

#### Declared targets versus Effective targets

The target kinds specified in the `targetRefs` stanza of a metaresource are referred to as *Declared target* kinds.

These are distinct from *Effective target* kinds, which are the kinds of target objects whose behaviors are actually augmented by the metaresource. That occurs when declared targets are not equal to the actual targets augmented by the metaresource, but rather serve as a means for reaching other levels (typically lower level) of a hierarchy of related object kinds ("hierarchy of nested contexts").

> To avoid ambiguity in the interpretation of the targets, metaresource designs MUST clearly define the extent of the effects of the metaresource respectively to the object kinds they can target (semantics of scoping a metaresource). This can be done via documentation and it typically refers to a known hierarchy of resource kinds.

Author: I think it's possible to encode this into the spec⸺as in the Policy Attachment spec, not in the `spec` field of metaresource CRs, to be clear.

It could be a required annotation/label of the CRD, for example. (Or "required" if the kinds that can be specified in the `targetRefs` stanza differ the one whose behaviour is actually augmented by the metaresource.)

Not sure how many metaresource controllers would actually use that piece of information from the CRD to shape the reconciliation logic of a metaresource CR. Probably none, given that one CRD implies one kind of target ultimately affected and that hardly changes. IOW, that's usually part of the design of the metaresource kind from the start. However, it won't harm having it in there.

The only thing is that I would probably make this a SHOULD in this case, so it doesn't break "conformity" for existing policy kinds. I.e., "MUST clear specify somehow; SHOULD specify in a annotation of the CRD."

@youngnick, WDYT?

Metaresource CRDs MUST clearly define the hierarchy of target resources they have effects upon, as well as the [semantics](#scoping-the-intent) of targeting each kind in this hierarchy.

The best way to visualize this hierarchy－and therefore the instances of objects organized by the hierarchy－is in the form of a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) whose roots are the least specific objects and the leaves are the most specific ones (and ultimately the effective targets of the metaresources). Using a DAG to represent the hierarchy of effective targets ensures that all the relevant objects are represented, and makes the calculation of corresponding combinatorial specs much easier.

For any given path within the DAG, nodes closer to a root are considered "higher" in the hierarchy, while nodes closer to a leaf are "lower." Higher nodes define broader, less specific configurations, whereas lower nodes define more specific ones.

Lower levels in the hierarchy (e.g., more specific kinds) *inherit* the definitions applied at the higher levels (e.g. less specific kinds), in such a way that higher level rules may be understood as having an “umbrella effect” over everything under that level.

> E.g., given the Gateway API’s hierarchy of network resources for the ingress use case `GatewayClass` > `Gateway` > `HTTPRoute` > `Backend`. A metaresource that attaches to a `GatewayClass` object, if defined as a metaresource kind ultimately to augment the behavior of `HTTPRoute` objects, affects all `Gateways` under the `GatewayClass`, as well as all `HTTPRoutes` under those `Gateways`. Any other instance of this metaresource kind targeting a lower level than the `GatewayClass` (e.g. `Gateway` or `HTTPRoute`, assuming it's supported) should be treated as a conflict against the higher level metaresource spec in the specific scope that is rooted at the lower level target, i.e., for the subset of the topology that is afftected by both metaresources.

Author: The concept of "conflict" is well defined across all over the GEP now. There are sections of the document describing it in the context of the hierarchical relationships between targetable resources, as well as rules for how to deal with them. I don't think using this word will be a problem here.

As for allowing resources lower in the hierarchy to "override" parent policies, that's basically the definition of the _Default_ merge strategy⸺with the only exception that I would avoid the word "override" here (already [explained](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3609#discussion_r2027286844).)

Conflicts between metaresources ultimately affecting the same scope MUST be resolved into so-called *Effective metaresources*, according to some defined [*merge strategies*](#merge-strategies).

#### Effective metaresources

The DAG that represents the hierarchy of targetable objects works as a map to orderly resolve, for each [effective target](#declared-targets-versus-effective-targets), a combinatorial spec that is collectively defined by the set of metaresources affecting the target. This combinatorial spec of each effective target is referred to as the *Effective metaresource* (or *Effective policy*).

The process of calculating Effective metaresources (Effective policies) consists of walking the hierarchy of target objects, from most specific to least specific (i.e., bottom-up, from the leaves towards the roots of the DAG of target objects) or from least specific to most specific (top-down), map reducing to a single metaresource spec each pair of metaresources adjacent to each other in the hierarchy, applying at each step one of the supported [*merge strategies*](#merge-strategies) (described below), until no more than one spec remains for each effective target.

> Between two metaresources in conflict and therefore whose specs are to be merged into one according to a given merge strategy, the least specific metaresource of the pair dictates the merge strategy to apply.

Author: I guess different people may have different opinions on this⸺which in itself is not ideal, though I'm sure it's something we all can live with⸺but, at least for me, I honestly believe that "most/less specific" terminology is even less ambiguous than "lower/higher in the hierarchy".

I use these two ways to describe it interchangeably nevertheless, also as a tactics to provide people with enough intuition to understand an otherwise somewhat abstract concept.

Hopefully [this paragraph](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HHJvbNhd3Fj57959f5gfmwCuM6kVM6Eh9edtplZil3Q/edit?tab=t.weqtkjszvh0l#heading=h.ofskj4203mnk) recently added will help avoid any confusion in this regard.

Metaresource kinds that implement more than one merge strategy MUST provide a way in the spec for the instances of the metaresource to specify the chosen strategy that the metaresource controller must use to calculate an effective metaresource out of two instances. If no merge strategy is specified, then implementations SHOULD use more-specific-wins merge strategy by default.

The following subsections define a set of rules to arrange metaresources for conflict resolution, as well as an abstract process to calculate effective metaresources.

#### Conflict resolution rules

If multiple metaresources have the same scope (that is, multiple instances of the same metaresource kind affect the same effective target), this is considered to be a conflict.

> A metaresource winning over another means this metaresource dictates the merge strategy to apply.

Author: You're right. I realise I used "winning" for two different things: dictating the merge strategy AND qualifying a spec that ends up in the effective metaresource in detriment of another. Fixed it.

> To determine which metaresources attached to objects in a hierarchy are higher or lower, use the following rules, continuing on ties:

Author: "priority"－I'd rather avoid introducing another concept that would require definition.

> 1. Between two metaresources at different levels of the hierarchy, the one attached higher wins (i.e. dictates the merge strategy to use to resolve the conflict).

Author: Done

> 2. Between two metaresources at the same level of the hierarchy, the older metaresource based on creation timestamp wins.

Author: Done

> 3. Between two metaresources at the same level of the hierarchy and identical creation timestamps, the metaresource appearing first in alphabetical order by `{namespace}/{name}` wins.

Author: Done

#### Merge strategies

A _merge strategy_ is a function that receives two conflicting specs and returns one.

There are 3 *basic merge strategies*:
* **None:** the metaresource with the oldest creation timestamp that is attached to a target wins, while all the other metaresources attached to the same target are rejected (`Accepted` status condition set to false).

> * **Defaults:** more specific specs beats less specific ones.

Reviewer 8: Are Defaults and Overrides flipped here? 
Defaults: configured higher in the hierarchy, so less specific beats more specific?
Overrides: lower in the hierarchy so is more specific?

Author: > Are Defaults and Overrides flipped here?

They are not.

> Defaults: configured higher in the hierarchy,

Defaults are configured higher in the hierarchy, yes.

> […] so less specific beats more specific?

However, as stated, it's _more specific_ that beats less specific; not the other way around.

> Overrides: lower in the hierarchy so is more specific?

Yes, lower in the hierarchy is more specific.

<br/>

Think of the Gateway and HTTPRoute kinds, for example. Gateway is higher than HTTPRoute. Gateways specify _less specific_ rules compared to HTTPRoutes, which in turn are _more specific_.

A default set at the level of a Gateway is initially valid for all HTTPRoutes under the Gateway (less specific). Lower down, it can be replaced for a specific HTTPRoute (more specific.) Therefore the _more specific_ policy rule set at the lower level of HTTPRoute (as in "lower than Gateway") beats the _less specific_ _default_ set at the higher level of Gateway.

Author: @shashankram, I used your insights to rewrite a bit the whole **Conflicting specs, Inheritance, Merge strategies, and Effective metaresources** section. Even though I couldn't really run away from "more specific/less specific", I really believe it's more clear now. I hope you agree.

Thanks for the input!

* **\<Custom>:** the spec of 2 metaresources are mixed into a composition of both specs, following a custom merge algorithm specified by the metaresource or policy kind.

The final set of *merge strategies* therefore supported by a metaresource CRD (base merge strategy \+ atomicity level) is any subset of the following, where \<Custom> is implementation-specific:
* None
* Atomic Defaults
* Atomic Overrides
* Patch Defaults
* Patch Overrides
* \<Custom> Defaults
* \<Custom> Overrides

Metaresource kinds MAY opt to implement any of these strategies, including multiple strategies.

Metaresource kinds that do not specify any merge strategy and only support targeting a single kind (with Declared target = Effective target), by default MUST implement the **None** merge strategy. (See the definition of [Direct](#direct) class of metaresources.)

Metaresource kinds that do not specify any merge strategy and support targeting multiple effective kinds, by default MUST implement the **Atomic Defaults** merge strategy.

> Metaresource kinds that implement more than one merge strategy MUST define a clear structure for the instances of metaresource to specify which of the supported strategies to apply. Instances of these metaresources MUST NOT be allowed to declare more than one merge strategy at a time, but only one of the supported strategies. If no merge strategy is specified by a given instance of the metaresource, the **Atomic Defaults** merge strategy MUST be assumed.

Reviewer 8: > Instances of these metaresources MUST NOT be allowed to declare more than one merge strategy at a time, but only one of the supported strategies

What does this mean? Are you referring to 2 policy CRs having different merge strategies?

Author: I meant one CR can only declare one merge strategy. E.g., if the CRD was designed to enable specifying `defaults` and `overrides` merge strategies, it's either `defaults` or `overrides` in any given CR, but not both simultaneously.

Two CRs of the same CRD can declare different merge strategies between them, if the CRD supports multiple specifying multiple strategies. E.g., one CR specifies `defaults`, another CR specifies `overrides`.

I'll rephrase it to avoid any confusion.

Author: There is no hard specification for a `mergeStrategy` field, so to speak. Implementations are free to come up with their own custom strategy names, field names to specify the chosen strategy in a CR, and even schema (should a single field not be enough to specify it). IOW, it is an enum.

* `c2` is augmented by the combination of `m1` + `m2`.

In the most trivial case where metaresources can only directly target the objects whose behavior they intend to augment (i.e. instances of `C` without any indirections) and no metaresource specs are merged at all, the outcome of the process of calculating effective metaresources is simplified to a 1:1 mapping between metaresource and target object at most, where the declared metaresource equals the effective one, with no combinatorial specs nor contextual variations.

### Classes of metaresources

The following two classes of metaresource kinds are defined: *Direct* and *Inherited*.

#### Direct

* A single kind supported in `spec.targetRefs.kind`
* Effects of the metaresources do not span across the hierarchy, i.e. the _Declared target kind_ is equal to the _Effective target kind_
* *None* is the only merge strategy supported
* If supported, could typically be implemented by directly extending the API of the target kind with the fields otherwise defined at the metaresource (e.g. Gateway API filter)

#### Inherited

* Superset of the above

> * Any metaresource kind that do not comply with at least one characteristic of the Direct class of metaresources

Reviewer 8: These are quite ambiguous without examples. Could you first define why "meta-resource classes" are necessary and why Direct and Inherited are relevant?

Author: Mainly to ease the transition from the current state of the GEP/s.

GEP-713 was once forked into two GEPs – 2648 and 2649, respectively for Direct and Inherited Policies. We're now merging them back into one single GEP.

The difference between these two classes (Direct and Inherited), if relevant, should emerge from the properties of metaresources specified, including and especially from the concept of merge strategy.

Reviewer 8: Those 2 GEPs are marked as declined. So this GEP should reintroduce those concepts before including them in the spec.

Author: Sorry. IDK if I follow. There's no spec other than the GEP itself. What do you mean by the "GEP should reintroduce before including in the spec"? This subsection of the guide-level explanation is meant to introduce/define the concepts.

Reviewer 8: I meant we should describe the motivation for "meta-resource classes` as it pertains to this GEP instead of assuming it is a well understood concept.

Author: Done

> ## End-to-end examples

Reviewer 8: Could you add example policies in YAML for all the scenarios described below

Reviewer 8: This is still missing, and would be a lot easier to make sense than the verbose graphs and text

!!! danger
    This GEP is in the process of being updated.
    Please see the discussion at https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/2927
    and expect further changes, although they will not be as extensive as the
    more focussed GEP-2648 and GEP-2649.
    Some options under discussion there may make the distinction between Direct
    and Inherited Policies moot, which would require a rework.

This GEP aims to standardize terminology and processes around using one Kubernetes
object to modify the functions of one or more other objects.

This GEP defines some terms, firstly: _Metaresource_.

A Kubernetes object that _augments_ the behavior of an object
in a standard way is called a _Metaresource_.

This document proposes controlling the creation of configuration in the underlying
Gateway data plane using two types of Policy Attachment.
A "Policy Attachment" is a specific type of _metaresource_ that can affect specific
settings across either one object (this is "Direct Policy Attachment"), or objects
in a hierarchy (this is "Inherited Policy Attachment").

> Individual policy APIs:

Author: Not sure if I understand the suggestion, @robscott. Are you proposing we do NOT remove these lines about the rules for "Individual policy APIs"?

* Defining implementation-specific functionalities for otherwise common APIs－e.g. to specify implementation-specific behavior for Gateway API HTTPRoute objects.
* Decoupling concerns for targeting personas with specific functionality and configuration－delegation of responsibilities, fine-grained RBAC, etc.
* Decoupling responsibility over the management and implementation of the metaresources themselves.
* Avoid alternatives based on annotations which are often non-standardized, poorly documented, and generally hard to maintain, in favor of proper, expressive APIs (self-documenting intents) instead.

### Definitions

- _**Metaresource**_: a resource that augments the behavior of another resource without modifying the definition of the resource. Metaresources MUST clearly define a _target_ and an _intent_ as defined in this GEP, and MUST clearly communicate status about whether the augmentation is happening or not.
  - The target of a metaresource specifies the resource or resources whose behavior the metaresource intends to augment.
  - The intent of a metaresource specifies what augmentation the metaresource will apply.

>   Metaresources are Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) that comply with a particular [structure](#metaresource-structure). This structure includes standardized fields for specifying the target(s), metaresource-specific fields to describe the intended augmentation, and standardized status fields to communicate whether the augmentation is happening or not.

Author: This is a fair point. Indeed I'm trying to blur the lines between these two concepts, namely "metaresource" and "policy". I guess it is partially because I myself do not see a clear difference other than policies being how metaresources are called in the context of Gateway API.

Paraphrasing a bit what you said: Gateway API defines _metaresource_ for the entire Kubernetes community, but any specific structure presented by Gateway API should be only for a specific instance we happen to call _policies_. Is that so?

Wouldn't that open for a case where implementations can define CRDs that "augment the behavior of other resources" (namely "metaresources") without strictly doing "policies"? What would the status of such CRDs wrt to GEP-713 be? Do they comply only with the title (or perhaps the first few paragraphs) of it, but nothing else? What's even the point of defining metaresources then? Is it OK to own the term without defining more structure for it?

There are other kinds of resources that are named "policies" in Kubernetes but whose structure have nothing to do with what we specify in GEP-713. Is that OK?

Sorry. Lots of questions, but there's no second agenda really, just provocative thinking. I thought we were going forward with proposing **Metaresources and Policy Attachment** as a pattern beyond Gateway API, as stated in the last goal:

> Provide a reference pattern to other implementations of metaresource and policy APIs outside of Gateway API, that are based on similar concepts (i.e., augmenting the behavior of other Kubernetes objects, attachment points, nested contexts and inheritance, Defaults & Overrides, etc.)

>   Metaresources are Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) that comply with a particular [structure](#metaresource-structure). This structure includes standardized fields for specifying the target(s), metaresource-specific fields to describe the intended augmentation, and standardized status fields to communicate whether the augmentation is happening or not.

Author: Understood. I'll make sure to fix this across the doc.
Expect to see a lot more "policy" almost wherever it now says "metaresource".

  type ColorPolicy struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    // Spec defines the desired state of the policy.
    Spec ColorPolicySpec `json:"spec"`

    // Status defines the current state of the policy.
    Status ColorPolicyStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
  }

  type ColorPolicySpec struct {
    // TargetRefs specify the targets of the policy by name.
    // The following kinds are supported: …
    // +listType=map
    // +listMapKey=group
    // +listMapKey=kind
    // +listMapKey=name
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16
    TargetRefs []gatewayapiv1alpha2.LocalPolicyTargetReference `json:"targetRefs"`

    // rest of the spec ("spec proper")…
  }
  ```
</details>

##### Label selectors

The target reference includes the label selectors used to select a set of objects whose behavior to augment. E.g.:

```yaml
apiVersion: policies.controller.io/v1
kind: ColorPolicy
metadata:
  name: my-color-policy
spec:
  targetRefs:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
    kind: Gateway
    selector: ## label selectors to a set of objects of the Gateway kind
      matchLabels:

>         env: production

Reviewer 6: They're not compliant with _this version_ of policy attachment. We can add more detail afterwards.

>         env: production

Author: @LiorLieberman

>         env: production

Reviewer 9: Can someone help me understand the effective/effort increase if we have this in?  I remember discussions around it in SLC - IIRC a big chuck of the implementations need label selectors to be compliant.

Example of Effective metaresources based on a hierarchy of Gateway API resources:

```mermaid
---
config:
  look: handDrawn
  theme: neutral
---
graph
    gc@{ shape: rect, label: "GatewayClass 1" }
    g@{ shape: rect, label: "Gateway 1" }
    r1@{ shape: rect, label: "Route 1" }
    r2@{ shape: rect, label: "Route 2" }
    b@{ shape: rect, label: "Backend 1" }
    m1@{ shape: stadium, label: "Metaresource 1" }
    m2@{ shape: stadium, label: "Metaresource 2" }

    gc --> g
    g --> r1
    g --> r2
    r1 --> b
    r2 --> b

    m1 -.-> g
    m2 -.-> r1
```

The above yields 2 Effective metaresources:
- For `Route 1`: a combination of `Metaresource 1` and `Metaresource 2`
- For `Route 2`: equal to `Metaresource 1`

> #### Merge strategies

Reviewer 4: I like the idea of merge strategies, but they're a massive addition to the scope of this GEP. I'd rather reserve this for a future addition to policy attachment. That would help keep the scope of what we graduate to GA in this PR very narrow and hopefully simplify the review of this PR. Ideally graduating to GA should be a process of refining existing concepts, not adding new ones.

Author: To be completely honest, without the concept of merge strategy I'm not quite sure what we'd be doing.

In my head, defaults, overrides _are_ merge strategies; just like their nuances of JSON patching versus full replacement of specs. 

Maybe that was me, but, in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/2927#discussioncomment-8991870, it felt like we wanted to consolidate Direct and Inherited classes around a well-defined concept of merge strategy.

Reviewer 8: How about start with an ImplementationSpecific option?

If multiple metaresources have the same scope (that is, multiple CRs based on the same metaresource kind affect the same effective target), this is considered to be a _conflict_.

Conflicts MUST be resolved according to some _merge strategy_. A merge strategy is a function that receives two conflicting specs and returns a new spec without conflict.

##### Basic merge strategies

> 3 *basic merge strategies* are defined:

Reviewer 8: "merge strategy" seems confusing here as the term should be reserved for how 2 policies are merged, and not to determine their relative prioritization on who decides how they are merged. None/Defaults/Overrides should be categorized as "policy priority". 

The atomicity levels defined below reflect the actual merge strategy.

Metaresource kinds that do not specify any merge strategy and support targeting multiple effective kinds, by default MUST implement the **Atomic Defaults** merge strategy.

Metaresource kinds that implement more than one merge strategy MUST define a clear structure for the metaresource CRs to specify which one of the supported strategies to apply. Metaresource CRs MUST NOT be allowed to declare more than one merge strategy at a time, but only one of the supported strategies. If no merge strategy is specified by a given metaresource CR, the **Atomic Defaults** merge strategy SHOULD be assumed, provided it's one of the supported merge strategies implemented by the metaresource kind.

For metaresource kinds that support merge strategy specified by the user at the CR, the following rules, continuing on ties, MUST be implemented to determine which merge strategy to apply between two metaresources in conflict:
1. Between two metaresources targeting at different levels of the hierarchy, the one attached higher (less specific) dictates the merge strategy to use to resolve the conflict.

> 2. Between two metaresources targeting at the same level of the hierarchy, the older metaresource based on creation timestamp dictates the merge strategy.

Reviewer 8: Defaults/Overrides doesn't make sense for policies applied to the same level. This should either be None (no merging, oldest wins), or a compositional merge that merges newer policies into older ones in order of priority from old(high)->new(low) without invalidating older policies.

In other words, the discoverability problem exists and must be addressed in light of the complexity associated with the topology of nested contexts induced by a set of hierarchically related resources. One should always have that topology in mind while asking questions regarding the behavior of a given resource, because just like a routing object (e.g. HTTPRoute) does not exist independently from its parent contexts (e.g. Gateways) or its children (e.g. Backends), any resource in focus may be just a part of a whole.

### Status reporting

#### Metaresource status

Metaresource CRDs MUST define a status stanza that allows for reporting the status of the metaresource with respect to each scope the resource may apply.

The basic status conditions are:

* **Accepted**: the metaresource passed both syntactic validation by the API server and semantic validation enforced by the controller, such as whether the target objects exist.

> * **Enforced**: the metaresource’s spec is guaranteed to be fully enforced, to the extent of what the controller can ensure.

Reviewer 4: This feels an awful lot like the previous "Ready" condition on Gateways - near impossible to implement in reality. I'd rather aim for something like "Programmed" here.

Author: We were also proposing `PartiallyEnforced`, which is an intermediary state between `Enforced` and `Overridden`.

However, `PartiallyProgrammed` sounds weird to me. It seems to suggest the controller did not finish programming the policy, which is not what we want to convey.

So, if we change `Enforced` to `Programmed`, would you say `PartiallyEnforced` should then become `PartiallyOverridden`?

cc @robscott

It lays out guidelines for Gateway API implementations and other stakeholders for the design and/or handling of custom resources in compliance with a pattern known as Policy Attachment.

!!! warning
    This GEP specifies a _pattern_, not an API field or new object. It defines some terms, including _Metaresource_, _Policies_ and _Policy Attachment_, and their related concepts.

!!! danger
    This pattern is so far agreed upon only by Gateway API implementers who were in need of an immediate solution and didn't want all their solutions to be completely different and disparate, but does not have wide agreement or review from the rest of Kubernetes (particularly API Machinery).
    It is then conceivable that this problem domain gets a different solution in core in the future at which time this pattern might be considered obsoleted by that one.
    When implementations have need of something that is not in the spec and free from the [user stories](#user-stories) for which this pattern has been primarily thought, they are encouraged to explore other means (e.g. trying to work their feature into the upstream spec) before considering introducing their own custom metaresources.

>     Examples of challenges associated with this pattern include the [Discoverability problem](#the-discoverability-problem) and the [Fanout status update problem](#fanout-status-update-problems).

Reviewer: I am NOT in favor of significantly weakening any of the caveat language. I think the caveats should be extremely noticeable, and maybe just a little jarring in the attempt to ensure readers pay attention and understand that they can get themselves into trouble.

I'm not necessarily against rewording, but I think starting with `This pattern is currently unique to the Gateway API community. It's possible that in the future a better and broader form of extending Kubernetes APIs will emerge that could make this one obsolete.` reads like "this is supported, come on in!" which I personally do not feel is the right messaging.

- The controller implementing the policy has its own predefined way to determine among multiple implemented merge strategies which merge strategy to apply to resolve the conflicts between the Policy CRs according to the [Conflict resolution rules](#conflict-resolution-rules) specified in this GEP. This approach MAY include configurations of the controller implementing the Policy kind or any other way other than specifying the merge strategy at individual Policy CRs.

Policy CRDs that let users specify at any individual Policy CR one of multiple implemented merge strategies MUST define a clear structure for the users to do so.

User MUST NOT be allowed to specify at any individual Policy CR more than one merge strategy at a time.

Two known patterns adopted by Policy implementations that support specifying one of multiple merge strategies in the Policy CRs are:

> - The definition of a `strategy` field in the `spec` stanza of the Policy, or equivalentely a `mergeType` field.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- The definition of a `mergeStrategy` field in the `spec` stanza of the Policy, or equivalentely a `mergeType` field.
```

In other words, the discoverability problem exists and must be addressed in light of the complexity associated with the topology of nested contexts induced by a set of hierarchically related resources. One should always have that topology in mind while asking questions regarding the behavior of a given resource, because just like a routing object (e.g. HTTPRoute) does not exist independently from its parent contexts (e.g. Gateways) or its children (e.g. Backends), any resource in focus may be just a part of a whole.

### Status reporting

#### Policy status

Policy CRDs MUST define a status stanza that allows for reporting the status of the policy with respect to each scope the resource may apply.

The basic status conditions are:

> * **Accepted**: the policy passed both syntactic validation by the API server and semantic validation enforced by the controller, such as whether the target objects exist.

Author: This makes sense. In fact, it was [suggested](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/2927#discussioncomment-9023920) at least once in the discussion that preceded this PR.

I would make it a follow up though.

Implementations SHOULD use their own unique domain prefix for this condition type. Gateway API implementations, for instance, SHOULD use the same domain as in the `controllerName` field on `GatewayClass` (or some other implementation-unique domain for implementations that do not use `GatewayClass`.)

E.g. – given a `Gateway` object that is targeted by a hypothetical `ColorPolicy` policy object named `policy-namespace/my-policy`, which is owned by a `colors.controller.k8s.io` controller and with status `Enforced` or `PartiallyEnforced`. The controller SHOULD add to the status of the `Gateway` object a condition `colors.controller.k8s.io/ColorPolicyAffected: true`, and reason ideally referring to the `policy-namespace/my-policy` by name.

Similarly, for a hypothetical `ColorPolicy` policy that targets a specific named section of the `Gateway` object (e.g., `http-listener`), the controller SHOULD add to the status of the listener section within the `Gateway` object a condition `colors.controller.k8s.io/ColorPolicyAffected: true`.

> For objects that do not have a `status.Conditions` field available (`Secret` is a good example), that object SHOULD instead have an annotation of `colors.controller.k8s.io/ColorPolicyAffected: true` added instead.

Reviewer 6: Future action, non-blocking: We should have a note for implementers in here to say "hey, try to batch or rate-limit your updates here or something", because if you do something like removing a Policy from a GatewayClass that has thousands of Routes rolling up to it, and you need to update all of those Routes, you run a strong risk of DOS'ing the apiserver.

#### Status needs to be namespaced by implementation

Because an object can be affected by multiple implementations at once, any added status MUST be namespaced by the implementation.

In Gateway API's Route Parent status, `parentRef` plus the controller name have been used for this.

> For a policy, something similar can be done, namespacing by the reference to the implementation's controller name.

Reviewer 8: This needs to be explicit and not leave room for ambiguity. Standardizing on a policy attachment Status API would be extremely beneficial to implementations and users.

Reviewer 4: +1

Namespacing by the originating policy cannot easily be done because the source could be more than one policy object.

#### Creating common data representation patterns

> Defining a _common_ pattern for including the details of an _arbitrarily defined_ object, to be included in a library for all possible implementations, is challenging, to say the least.

Reviewer 8: What details are you referring to? Please include examples.

Author: This section was basically kept from the original GEP: https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-713/#creating-common-data-representation-patterns

IMO, we don't need an example here.

In a nutshell, what the section says is: it is not possible to design a common status stanza, with predefined fields, that cover for all possible policies.

#### Fanout status update problems

The fanout problem is that, when an update takes place in a single object (a policy, or an object with a policy attached), an implementation may need to update _many_ objects if it needs to place details of what policy applies, or what the resultant set of policies is on _every_ object.

Historically, this is a risky strategy and needs to be carefully applied, as it's an excellent way to create apiserver load problems, which can produce a large range of bad effects for cluster stability.

This does not mean that nothing at all that affects multiple objects can be done, but that careful consideration of what information is stored in status, so that _every_ policy update does not require a corresponding status update, is advised.

## Current use of policies

### Implementations

These are a few known implementations of policies in compliance with this GEP.

Users should refer to the official documentation from each implementation for for more up to date information.

#### Gateway API (core)

Gateway API defines two kinds of Direct policies, both for augmenting the behavior of Kubernetes `Service` resources:

> | Policy kind               | Description                                                                                                     | Target kinds    | Merge strategies | Policy class |

Reviewer 8: We should standardize the Status API for existing policies. A Status API column is required to ensure these APIs are actually compliant with the entirety of this proposal.

Reviewer 4: +1. It's fine if this is a follow up, but I think it's critical to at least note that this needs to be done and/or point to what we're already doing with our Gateway API policies as a recommendation for others.

| ------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |---------------- | ---------------- | ------------ |
| **BackendTLSPolicy**      | TLS configuration of the connection from the Gateway to a backend pod (set of pods) via the Service API object. | Service, _Port_ | None             | Direct       |
| **XBackendTrafficPolicy** | Configuration for how traffic to a target backend should be handled (retries and session persistence)           | _Port_          | None             | Direct       |

#### Envoy Gateway

> <small>https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/docs/api/extension_types/</small>

Reviewer 4: This should probably be a link. Same comment applies to all links below. See https://deploy-preview-3609--kubernetes-sigs-gateway-api.netlify.app/geps/gep-713/#envoy-gateway

#### NGINX Gateway Fabric

<small>https://docs.nginx.com/nginx-gateway-fabric/overview/custom-policies/</small>

Gateway API implementation that supports Gateway API’s `BackendTLSPolicy` as well as the following kinds of policies:

| Policy kind                | Description                                              | Target kinds                  | Merge strategies   | Policy class |
| -------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | ------------------ | ------------ |
| **ClientSettingsPolicy**   | Define settings related to tracing, metrics, or logging. | Gateway, HTTPRoute, GRPCRoute | Patch defaults     | Inherited    |
| **ObservabilityPolicy**    | Configure connection behavior between client and NGINX.  | HTTPRoute, GRPCRoute          | None               | Direct       |
| **UpstreamSettingsPolicy** | Configure connection behavior between NGINX and backend. | Service                       | None               | Direct       |

> #### Gloo Gateway

Reviewer 8: Please also include https://github.com/kgateway-dev/kgateway, which is the next gen version of Gloo

Reviewer 4: Do you have a link that lists all the policies you support?

### Status reporting

#### Policy status

Policy CRDs MUST define a status stanza that allows for reporting the status of the policy with respect to each scope the resource may apply.

The basic status conditions are:

* **Accepted**: the policy passed both syntactic validation by the API server and semantic validation enforced by the controller, such as whether the target objects exist.
* **Enforced**: the policy's spec is guaranteed to be fully enforced, to the extent of what the controller can ensure.
* **PartiallyEnforced**: parts of the policy's spec is guaranteed to be enforced, while other parts are known to have been superseded by other specs, to the extent of what the controller can ensure. The status should include details highlighting which parts of the policy are enforced and which parts have been superseded, with the references to all other related policies.
* **Overridden**: the policy's spec is known to have been fully overridden by other specs. The status should include the references to the other related policies.

> 

Reviewer 10: What do you think about an extra status condition for the **overriding** policy in addition to the above conditions `Enforced`, `PartiallyEnforced`, and `Overridden` referring to the **overridden** policy? Something like
```
Kind: ColorPolicy
Name: my-color-policy
...
Conditions:
  ...
  Type:    Overrides
  Status:  True
  Reason:  Overrides
  Message: "Hey user, your ColorPolicy default/my-color-policy overrides some old ShadePolicy default/my-shade-policy"
```

Policy implementations SHOULD support these basic status conditions.

#### Target object status

Implementations of Policies kinds SHOULD put a condition into `status.Conditions` of any objects affected by the policy.

That condition, if added, MUST be named according to the pattern `<metaresource-kind>Affected` (e.g. `colors.controller.k8s.io/ColorPolicyAffected`), and SHOULD include an `observedGeneration` field kept up to date when the spec of the target object changes.

Implementations SHOULD use their own unique domain prefix for this condition type. Gateway API implementations, for instance, SHOULD use the same domain as in the `controllerName` field on `GatewayClass` (or some other implementation-unique domain for implementations that do not use `GatewayClass`.)

> E.g. – given a `Gateway` object that is targeted by a hypothetical `ColorPolicy` policy object named `policy-namespace/my-policy`, which is owned by a `colors.controller.k8s.io` controller and with status `Enforced` or `PartiallyEnforced`. The controller SHOULD add to the status of the `Gateway` object a condition `colors.controller.k8s.io/ColorPolicyAffected: true`, and reason ideally referring to the `policy-namespace/my-policy` by name.

Reviewer 10: `Condition.Reason` is a ["programmatic identifier"](https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/04507a37f6a4a8872066897a539086f6255fe662/pkg/apis/meta/v1/types.go#L1619-L1635) (or even a ["(brief) machine readable reason"](https://github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/blob/04507a37f6a4a8872066897a539086f6255fe662/pkg/apis/meta/v1/types.go#L1492C5-L1492C36)), so I think the right place to refer to `policy-namespace/my-policy` by name is  `Condition.Message`.

* Issue: [#713](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/713)
* Status: Memorandum

(See status definitions [here](/geps/overview/#gep-states))

## TL;DR

This GEP aims to standardize terminology and processes around "metaresources", i.e., using one Kubernetes object to modify the functions of one or more other objects.

It lays out guidelines for Gateway API implementations and other stakeholders for the design and/or handling of custom resources in compliance with a pattern known as Policy Attachment.

!!! warning

>     This GEP specifies a _pattern_, not an API field or new object. It defines some terms, including _Metaresource_, _Policies_ and _Policy Attachment_, and their related concepts.

Reviewer 4: A concern here is that when I look at the [deploy preview](https://deploy-preview-3609--kubernetes-sigs-gateway-api.netlify.app/geps/gep-713/#understanding-effective-policies) for this, the number of warnings at the top of the page are pretty overwhelming. I think the text here is good, but I don't think it needs to be included in a `warning` block.

<img width="964" height="709" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ff7ea339-3b3d-43dd-b236-de2e22e5e515" />

Author: We have a `warning`, a `danger` and an `info` block here. Should them all be turned into regular paragraphs or just the `warning` one?

I'll make them all paragraphs for now, but happy to revert if needed.

  PolicyReasonPartiallyProgrammed PolicyConditionReason = "PartiallyProgrammed"

  // PolicyReasonReconciling is used with the "Programmed" condition to indicate the policy is currently being
  // reconciled by the controller.
  PolicyReasonReconciling PolicyConditionReason = "Reconciling"

  // PolicyReasonOverridden is used with the "Programmed" condition to indicate the policy has been fully
  // overridden by other specs during conflict resolution.
  // The status message SHOULD include the references to the other related policies.
  PolicyReasonOverridden PolicyConditionReason = "Overridden"
)
```

The following table summarizes the possible statuses:

| Accepted                                      | Programmed                              |
|:---------------------------------------------:|:---------------------------------------:|
| False (Conflicted / Invalid / TargetNotFound) | ∅                                       |
| True                                          | False (Reconciling / Overridden)        |
| True                                          | True (Programmed / PartiallyProgrammed) |

##### Using upstream `PolicyAncestorStatus` struct

> _Status:_ Provisional

Author: OK. Let's make it `Experimental` then. I think many implementations still need to catch up on this.

Policy objects SHOULD use the upstream `PolicyAncestorStatus` struct in their respective Status structs. Please see the included `PolicyAncestorStatus` struct, and its use in the `BackendTLSPolicy` object for detailed examples. Included here is a representative version.

This pattern enables different conditions to be set for different "Ancestors" of the target resource. This is particularly helpful for policies that may be implemented by multiple controllers or attached to resources with different effects or capabilities. For example a Policy that could attach to Route or Service to set load balancing properties may be reconciled by multiple controllers, and so needs further namespacing of its status. This pattern also provides a clear view of what resources a policy is affecting.

For the best integration with community tooling and consistency across the broader community, we recommend that all implementations transition to Policy status with this kind of nested structure.

This is an `Ancestor` status rather than a `Parent` status, as in the Route status, because, for Policy Attachment, the relevant object may or may not be the direct parent.

> For example, `BackendTLSPolicy` directly attaches to a Service, which may be included in multiple Routes, in multiple Gateways. However, for many implementations, the status of the `BackendTLSPolicy` will be different only at the Gateway level, so Gateway is the relevant Ancestor for the status. Each Gateway that has a Route that includes a backend with an attached `BackendTLSPolicy` SHOULD have a separate `PolicyAncestorStatus` section in the `BackendTLSPolicy`'s `status.ancestors` stanza, which mandates that entries must be distinct using the combination of the `AncestorRef` and the `ControllerName` fields as a key. See [GEP-1897][../gep-1897/index.md] for the exact details.

Reviewer 4: The link to GEP-1897 isn't working
